[Amit Varma]: If there is one thing that is certain in this world, it is that I am a disgrace to Warsaw.
[Amit Varma]: I've lived in this most filmy suburb of Mumbai for the last 15 years and have been here throughout
[Unknown]: the 189 weeks that the scene and the unseen has been running.
[Amit Varma]: I've recorded episodes on economics, public policy, political philosophy, history, sociology,
[Amit Varma]: and sports, but not a single episode on cinema, not a single episode on entertainment, not
[Unknown]: a single episode on acting or direction or cinematography, or even music.
[Amit Varma]: And I say in Warsaw, this is an unpardonable, unspeakable, eldritch, monstrous omission,
[Unknown]: and it will be too late for redemption if I don't do something right now.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In one sense, you could say that we are all actors.
[Amit Varma]: We are often performing for others and always performing for ourselves.
[Unknown]: Today's episode is about acting, but not acting in this deep metaphysical sense, which may
[Unknown]: or may not be me acting profound to myself.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, my guests today are two wonderful actors who have made a name for themselves
[Amit Varma]: doing independent cinema and cutting edge web series.
[Amit Varma]: These are exciting times in Indian entertainment.
[Amit Varma]: And these two are both living their dream and paying their dues.
[Amit Varma]: Being an actor in Mumbai can be turbulent, but so many different worlds and sensibilities
[Amit Varma]: colliding with each other.
[Amit Varma]: Jessica Duggal studied mathematics in college, became a researcher and wonk for a while,
[Amit Varma]: but then fell in love with acting and decided that was all she wanted to do.
[Amit Varma]: She's acted in films like Kissa, Manto, and Lootcase, as also in web series like Delhi
[Amit Varma]: Crime, Made in Heaven, Mirzapur, and A Suitable Boy.
[Amit Varma]: Her husband Mukul Chadha also studied math in college, though not with Rasika, and did
[Unknown]: an MBA from IIM Ahmedabad.
[Amit Varma]: He then became a banker in New York and single handedly caused the 2008 financial crisis.
[Amit Varma]: He then gave it up to become an actor.
[Amit Varma]: His most recent part was a lead role in the Indian version of The Office.
[Amit Varma]: He has also acted a fair bit in independent cinema and does improv theater in Mumbai as
[Amit Varma]: well.
[Amit Varma]: Mukul and I were both serious poker players once upon a time, which is how we became friends.
[Amit Varma]: I'd been thinking for a while of inviting Mukul and Rasika onto the show to talk about
[Amit Varma]: their journeys, the state of Indian cinema, and the craft of acting.
[Amit Varma]: I love the conversation we ended up having.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen has been a labor of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this.
[Amit Varma]: For every episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or
[Amit Varma]: even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going sceneunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Rasika and Mukul, welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Guest 2]: Well, thank you for having us, Amit.
[Guest 2]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: You know, before we start talking about your acting careers, which sort of and about the
[Amit Varma]: craft itself and Indian cinema and all of that, I'm very curious to sort of know about
[Amit Varma]: your personal backgrounds.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll start with Mukul first, because Mukul, I don't know if you remember, but and this
[Amit Varma]: almost sounds now that I realize it, it almost sounds creepy, but I kind of remember the
[Amit Varma]: exact time when we met, which was in March or April 2007, where a mutual friend of ours,
[Amit Varma]: Manish Vij, the great Sepia Mutiny blogger, he'd lived in Bombay for a few years, and
[Amit Varma]: he was moving back to the States and he had a farewell party in some Bandra nightclub
[Amit Varma]: and you dropped in for a while.
[Amit Varma]: And I was introduced to you and told that this is Mukul Chaddha, the actor.
[Amit Varma]: What I kind of noticed about your career is, you know, people often accuse me of having
[Amit Varma]: had an interesting life in just in terms of CV, because, you know, in the 90s, there is
[Amit Varma]: all the MTV and Channel V. And then there is in the 40s, there is a sort of journalism
[Amit Varma]: and the blogging and everything and then there's five years as a professional poker player,
[Amit Varma]: and now podcasting and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And your career is also seems, you know, even more interesting than mine, because you actually
[Amit Varma]: share the poker player part of it.
[Amit Varma]: And plus, you you know, you were an MBA and I am Ahmedabad.
[Amit Varma]: You were a banker in New York, where you also studied the Lee Strasberg school.
[Amit Varma]: And now you've come back here.
[Amit Varma]: And you're not just acting, you're also you know, you wrote a lovely short film recently
[Amit Varma]: banana bread.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your journey and you know, how you took all these twists
[Amit Varma]: and turns.
[Guest 2]: Well, on paper, that sounds wonderful in the way you if you introduce it like that, then
[Guest 2]: suddenly I start feeling good about myself.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, I remember your I first heard of you and you were a cricket writer.
[Guest 2]: So I'd heard of the Amit Verma and I think that's what I said to you when we first met
[Guest 2]: is, oh, you're that Amit Verma because you know, I read a lot of your stuff.
[Guest 2]: I'm a huge cricket fan.
[Guest 2]: So I read your stuff.
[Guest 2]: And then of course, we met very often on the poker tables.
[Guest 2]: As far as my journey was concerned, I I started off my life doing something completely different.
[Guest 2]: As you've mentioned, I did a classical MBA and you know, according to finance and I was
[Guest 2]: lucky enough to get a job on Wall Street and Lehman Brothers.
[Guest 2]: So I was for the most part, I was a research analyst.
[Guest 2]: I was analyzing the debt of these big behemoths, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, primarily, I was
[Guest 2]: the lead analyst on their debt and other US agencies is pointless for some of your listeners.
[Guest 2]: But I was analyzing their debt for the most part of what I did.
[Guest 2]: I was there on Lehman Brothers for six years in New York.
[Guest 2]: And yeah, acting was always something that I was interested in.
[Guest 2]: But I think growing up at the time I did grow up, it wasn't an easy decision or it wasn't
[Guest 2]: something you did if you, you know, if especially if you're good in studies, you know that unfortunately,
[Guest 2]: that's how we grew up.
[Guest 2]: You know, it was people became actors if they weren't good in studies or at least that was
[Guest 2]: what we were told by parents and everybody else.
[Guest 2]: So I was always interested.
[Guest 2]: I always was on stage in school, in college, etc.
[Guest 2]: And even while in New York, we started a theater group called Alter Ego, which was for people
[Guest 2]: who were working professionals, we'd rehearse only on weekends and weeknights.
[Guest 2]: And then I did classes at least, but to me, it was always a sort of very serious hobby.
[Guest 2]: You know, I never thought of it as something more than that.
[Guest 2]: But obviously, somewhere down the line, working at Lehman Brothers, Wall Street wasn't for
[Guest 2]: me.
[Guest 2]: One part was I really wanted to come back to India.
[Guest 2]: And the other was I just, you know, I just, you know, while the finance part interested
[Guest 2]: me academically while studying it, and even initially in the first few years, and the
[Guest 2]: good part about Wall Street is that they don't illusions from day one, you know, you pretty
[Guest 2]: much enter and they tell you how much of a dog-eat-dog world it is.
[Guest 2]: And everybody's just out to make money.
[Guest 2]: And you know, whether you're screwing the customer, it doesn't really matter.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, there's absolutely no, you know, nobody gets disillusioned along the
[Guest 2]: way.
[Guest 2]: So you realize very much, you know, in advance that either this is for me or not for me.
[Guest 2]: But it's also very hard to quit a job like that.
[Guest 2]: So it took me a while before I could muster up the courage to quit.
[Guest 2]: Also, I didn't know what else I would do.
[Guest 2]: So I wanted to move back to India, but I didn't know what I would do.
[Guest 2]: In fact, when I would come back to India on holidays, I would meet friends of mine, you
[Guest 2]: know, ex-classmates and ask them in finance, you know, and say, you know, what are you
[Guest 2]: guys doing?
[Guest 2]: And you know, what could I move back and do?
[Guest 2]: And all of them said that we want to move to where you are working, you know, they want
[Guest 2]: to quit their jobs and move to New York.
[Guest 2]: So I found that it would be very hard to perhaps move to a place where everyone's aspiring
[Guest 2]: to go to where I've come from.
[Guest 2]: And I didn't know what I'd want to do.
[Guest 2]: So eventually, I think after, you know, a long time of thinking about it, and dragging
[Guest 2]: my feet on it for a while, it took me six years.
[Guest 2]: And then I finally quit and I moved back to India without anything, which I know shocked
[Guest 2]: everybody in my family, because they couldn't understand how I could do something like that.
[Guest 2]: And you know, here I was the poster child for all, you know, relatives, I mean, NRI
[Guest 2]: banker in New York, and then I was unemployed in Bombay.
[Guest 2]: And I think I wouldn't say that I chose to become an actor then, in fact, I did not.
[Guest 2]: That would have been too much of a leap for me.
[Guest 2]: I told myself I'm taking a sabbatical a couple of years, because I didn't know what I wanted
[Guest 2]: to do.
[Guest 2]: So the two things I was interested in were writing and acting, and I wanted to explore
[Guest 2]: them.
[Guest 2]: So I thought I'd do that for a couple of years, a year or two years and, and then see where
[Guest 2]: you know, life takes me.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I somewhere I think I always imagined I might have, you know, started as some something
[Guest 2]: on my own, or got another job later.
[Guest 2]: But you know, because I was doing theatre for a while or writing, I might, you know,
[Guest 2]: get a leg into that world.
[Guest 2]: And maybe hopefully do you know, like we did in New York, you know, do evening rehearsals
[Guest 2]: and acting plays once in a while.
[Guest 2]: But once I started doing it, and the writing didn't go very far, I have a lot of unfinished,
[Guest 2]: some finished and a lot of unfinished stories on my laptop.
[Guest 2]: So which I hope to get back to someday.
[Guest 2]: So yes, in that sense, you know, banana bread was wonderful for me to, you know, I wrote
[Guest 2]: it together, it really felt wonderful to be able to fulfil some part of that.
[Guest 2]: But the writing didn't really go very far.
[Guest 2]: The acting did in the sense I started doing theatre in Bombay, and it's easier because
[Guest 2]: you know, writing is a very solitary, as you know, it's a very solitary occupation.
[Guest 2]: It's not just the skill, it's also the temperament to keep doing things and, and manage to finish
[Guest 2]: work.
[Guest 2]: Whereas with theatre, once you join a play, which is what I did, you know, the rehearsal
[Guest 2]: schedule is set, you know, there's a show date, you have to do it.
[Guest 2]: And so I started doing that.
[Guest 2]: And I enjoyed it enough that I didn't quit, you know, it was a so called sabbatical for
[Guest 2]: maybe a year initially, then it became two years.
[Guest 2]: And then I was just stretching it on.
[Guest 2]: Because I didn't, I didn't have the guts, I think, to admit to myself that I wanted
[Guest 2]: to do this full time.
[Guest 2]: So it just kept, but I wasn't quitting either, you know, I was continuing to do this.
[Guest 2]: And I did this for a while, I think I just continued, I think, if I have any regrets,
[Guest 2]: though, that, you know, a couple of years after that, also, when I was kind of telling
[Guest 2]: myself, I'm kind of doing this semi seriously, but not, you know, as a full time career,
[Guest 2]: I didn't admit that to myself, until I was doing it long enough that one fine day I realised,
[Guest 2]: you know, I have become a full time actor, I mean, I'm doing this.
[Guest 2]: So it did take me a little while.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, that's, that's kind of the journey with, you know, as to how I became an actor.
[Amit Varma]: And the little part of your eclectic background that I forgot to mention is that you were
[Amit Varma]: a Chadha brought up in Chennai, and you can make great dosas, which is also fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And you were talking about sort of, you know, writing being the solitary act and the rest
[Amit Varma]: of it working out, because you know, you're working with other people, and there are constantly
[Amit Varma]: things happening.
[Amit Varma]: And it seemed to me that, you know, that trade off is interesting, because when I was a kid,
[Amit Varma]: I was torn between do I want to be a writer or do I one day want to direct films, because
[Amit Varma]: I was into a lot of world cinema and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then I thought, no, if I'm writing something, I am completely in control of what I'm writing.
[Amit Varma]: If I'm into, you know, the industry, I have to then coordinate with a bunch of people
[Amit Varma]: sell my ideas to others, there are so many things out of my control.
[Amit Varma]: So which is why I kind of came to writing, but it's interesting that, you know, your
[Amit Varma]: journey seems so almost so serendipitous, like, you know, John Lennon says, life is
[Amit Varma]: what happens to you when you're busy making other plans.
[Amit Varma]: And it's that kind of a feeling, Rasika, it's kind of, you know, from, you know, the interviews
[Amit Varma]: that I watched of yours on YouTube, and so on, it, it feels a bit like that, as well,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that, you know, you were almost on the way to becoming like a policy wonk,
[Amit Varma]: the kind of person who would be on my show anyway.
[Amit Varma]: But then you move from kind of research to acting, tell me a bit about that journey,
[Amit Varma]: like was acting something you were always interested in and considered or did it just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, grow from an interest to something more than that?
[Guest 1]: Not so consciously, actually, even if it was, I wasn't really thinking of it that consciously.
[Guest 1]: And I didn't really think that it could be a career primarily because there was no precedence
[Guest 1]: of that in the environment that I grew up in.
[Guest 1]: So I grew up in Jamshedpur and my father runs a business and my mother runs a boutique.
[Guest 1]: And I didn't really think that acting could be a career that was not a part of my worldview.
[Guest 1]: But I was always one of those people in school who would jump on stage at the drop of a hat,
[Guest 1]: you know, and was very happy to be on stage, but that's about it.
[Guest 1]: Then I went to Delhi University and I studied at LSR and I was studying Maths Honours much
[Guest 1]: like Mukul.
[Guest 1]: Mukul was also studying Maths Honours many years before me.
[Guest 1]: So I think LSR is the first place where I would say I started acting seriously because
[Guest 1]: I was introduced suddenly to a new world where I realized that there's a lot to learn and
[Guest 1]: there's so much talent.
[Guest 1]: And most of the people I interacted with at LSR, they'd all done theatre for a while and
[Guest 1]: trained under professionals and they just knew so much more than my little Jamshedpur
[Guest 1]: life had exposed me to.
[Guest 1]: So I was quite taken in by all of that.
[Guest 1]: So Maths was one of the toughest subjects in Delhi University and I was so honestly
[Guest 1]: very bored and I still think that was one of the worst decisions in my life.
[Guest 1]: I would have loved to study History or Political Science or even Economics at DU, but I was
[Guest 1]: quite bored with Maths Honours and so I started doing a lot of theatre on the side and I started
[Guest 1]: watching a lot of theatre in Delhi also.
[Guest 1]: So I wouldn't go back home for holidays, would take buses to the Habitat Centre and or the
[Guest 1]: Sriram Centre and watch a lot of plays and also try and do as much theatre as I could,
[Guest 1]: as much as a rigorous course as Maths Honours allowed me to.
[Guest 1]: So I think my first real acting experience was with a lovely theatre person called Anamika
[Guest 1]: Haksal, who's recently made a film as well.
[Guest 1]: And the first play I did was a play called Riders to the Sea and we did the translated
[Guest 1]: version in Hindi.
[Guest 1]: And so that was my first acting experience and I was quite taken in by all of that and
[Guest 1]: very interested in what I was doing at LSR as part of the Dramatic Society.
[Guest 1]: But again, there was so much talent around me that I didn't have the confidence to apply
[Guest 1]: to NSD, which was the only other thing that I knew of around in which you train as an
[Guest 1]: actor.
[Guest 1]: So I didn't really take that seriously, I didn't know what to do after college, but
[Guest 1]: enthu to tha bahut, you know, so whatever came my way, I was very happy to sort of take
[Guest 1]: that up enthusiastically.
[Guest 1]: So when I was in my third year, the girl who was in the room in front of my room in the
[Guest 1]: hostel was filling a form for a Mass Communication course, one at Jamia, one at Xavier's and
[Guest 1]: one at Sophia's.
[Guest 1]: So I was sitting in her room and flipping through the brochure and I saw this brochure
[Guest 1]: of the course of Social Communications Media at Sophia's.
[Guest 1]: So I went through the list of subjects and one of them said, Film Studies and I said
[Guest 1]: yeh bahut interesting hai and I had been part of some film clubs at LSR and had watched
[Guest 1]: a few films, but I never really got an opportunity to explore that further.
[Guest 1]: In fact, my first recollection of being very mesmerized by a clip of a film that I saw
[Guest 1]: was at, funnily enough, at a conference on conflict and peace, which was initiated by
[Guest 1]: an organization that the then principal of LSR, Dr. Meenakshi Gopinath used to run.
[Guest 1]: And somebody showed a clip of Pather Panchali and I was very taken in by that clip and it
[Guest 1]: stayed with me for a while, but I didn't really get an opportunity to sort of watch a lot
[Guest 1]: of films while I was at hostel.
[Guest 1]: And things were not available on DLD and online as they are today.
[Guest 1]: So when I saw Film Studies in that brochure, I said, chalo yeh toh interesting hai, let
[Guest 1]: me apply for it.
[Guest 1]: And I also applied for it because it was one of the only courses which had an entrance
[Guest 1]: exam after my exams at Maths Honours would have finished.
[Guest 1]: So it was kind of by chance.
[Guest 1]: So I applied to Social Communications Media and the girl whose brochure I was going through,
[Guest 1]: I don't think she got through, but I did.
[Guest 1]: And I didn't think that I really wanted to study that course.
[Guest 1]: I didn't know what I wanted to do.
[Guest 1]: And my parents said, oh, I think you should go abroad to study something.
[Guest 1]: You know, it was that kind of a thing.
[Guest 1]: And they said, chalo 16th year of education ho jayega, kar lo yeh course.
[Guest 1]: Aise theek hai.
[Guest 1]: So I went to Sophia's and I think that one year at Sophia's was one of the best years
[Guest 1]: of my life.
[Guest 1]: I've never met a bunch of women or a bunch of people who I've studied with who are so
[Guest 1]: like each other.
[Guest 1]: We were all from similar backgrounds, similar colleges.
[Guest 1]: And we were probably all the kind of people in college who are very enthusiastic about
[Guest 1]: anything, you know.
[Guest 1]: So it was very interesting to be a part of that course and journalism was also one of
[Guest 1]: the papers.
[Guest 1]: And Jerry Pinto was a teacher, P. Sainath was a teacher, Paromita took a few classes
[Guest 1]: on filmmaking.
[Guest 1]: So very interesting bunch of people.
[Guest 1]: And I think I was very moved by every class that I attended at Sophia's.
[Guest 1]: After Sophia's, after I finished that one year course, again, I didn't know what to
[Guest 1]: do because the course is very interesting, it teaches you a lot.
[Guest 1]: And most importantly, it gives you a very interesting worldview, but you're not really
[Guest 1]: specialized in anything to take that further.
[Guest 1]: So I didn't know what to do.
[Guest 1]: So I wrote emails to a couple of people and said, you know, I think I want to be a research
[Guest 1]: assistant.
[Guest 1]: I just want to help somebody gather some information.
[Guest 1]: That's how vague my intent was.
[Guest 1]: And I got an email from somebody which said that Abhijeet Banerjee and Rohini Pandey are
[Guest 1]: starting a research project which is based in Lucknow and they're looking for somebody
[Guest 1]: to get secondary research data material for them.
[Guest 1]: I didn't know what that even meant, honestly.
[Guest 1]: I had no academic background in the social sciences.
[Guest 1]: I had not studied even statistics, you know, I was a math student.
[Guest 1]: So I said, this sounds like fun, I'll move to Lucknow, so I packed my bags and a week
[Guest 1]: later I was in Lucknow and trying to make inroads into PWD offices, the Vidhan Sabha
[Guest 1]: to get information for Abhijeet and Rohini's project.
[Guest 1]: I didn't understand how that information was really going to be used or anything like that.
[Guest 1]: But I was pretty good at it because enthusiasm, of course, and also I think people are less
[Guest 1]: suspicious of a young woman trying.
[Guest 1]: So I would say, sir, we have a college project, so please let me come to the library.
[Guest 1]: So I would get access to a lot of things which otherwise might be, you know, wrapped in a
[Guest 1]: lot of bureaucracy.
[Guest 1]: So I collected that material for them and they were quite happy with what I had done.
[Guest 1]: So I was even more encouraged to stick around.
[Guest 1]: So I worked on the project for about five months and then I think just living in Lucknow
[Guest 1]: alone and not having a bunch of friends and not being able to access public space like
[Guest 1]: I had become used to accessing in Bombay, I decided that I wanted to move back.
[Guest 1]: So I started looking for similar jobs in Bombay and somebody wrote me an email saying that
[Guest 1]: Pukar, which was an organization started by Arjuna Padure, Partners for Urban Knowledge
[Guest 1]: Action and Research, they were doing a project on gender and public space, which was being
[Guest 1]: done by Shilpa Phatke, Sameera Khan and Shilpa Ranade.
[Guest 1]: So I wrote them an email and I got that job as a research assistant and I came back to
[Guest 1]: Bombay to work on that.
[Guest 1]: That was slightly more interesting, but because it was not qualitative, it was an ethnographic
[Guest 1]: kind of study.
[Guest 1]: So it required me to actually study the behavior of women in public spaces.
[Guest 1]: So I would go to stations regularly and watch food stalls and who stood at a food stall
[Guest 1]: to eat their food, who just carried their food and left.
[Guest 1]: And mostly, most women, it was really startling to see that women would not stand and eat
[Guest 1]: at a public stall.
[Guest 1]: So I worked on that project for a long time and my friends would make fun of me that,
[Guest 1]: so how many toilets are there for women in Andheri Station?
[Guest 1]: And there was a time when I knew exactly what the figures were.
[Guest 1]: I would say, Andheri East Station mein itna hai, Andheri West mein itna hai because I
[Guest 1]: had done all of that.
[Guest 1]: So and how the toilets function and all of that.
[Guest 1]: So it was very interesting to do that, but I soon realized that while all of this is
[Guest 1]: interesting, unless I went and got a formal education in the social sciences, I would
[Guest 1]: not really be able to understand this more than what I understand of it today.
[Guest 1]: And I really didn't feel like I had the energy for that.
[Guest 1]: And I'd heard a lot of academic conversations around me.
[Guest 1]: And while they were very interesting, I also felt like it was not my cup of tea.
[Guest 1]: I wanted something which was more tangible, maybe.
[Guest 1]: So that's when I was flipping through the newspaper one day and I found that FDII was
[Guest 1]: restarting their acting course.
[Guest 1]: This was in 2004.
[Guest 1]: It had shut down in 76.
[Guest 1]: I had studied film at Sophia's.
[Guest 1]: So I was very mesmerized by the idea of a film school, and especially one like FDII,
[Guest 1]: which had a history of dissent.
[Guest 1]: So I said, this should be an interesting space.
[Guest 1]: And I had a few friends from there, and they were totally in love with the idea of being
[Guest 1]: in the institute.
[Guest 1]: So I'd heard about this wisdom tree where people sit together and talk about cinema,
[Guest 1]: and every evening you get to watch a film.
[Guest 1]: And that the physical space, the place that FDII is located in, was once Prabhat Studios.
[Guest 1]: And I was like, wow, I'm going to be a part of history.
[Guest 1]: You know, so that's when I applied for FDII.
[Guest 1]: I didn't think I would make it because there was a very rigorous three-round entrance exam.
[Guest 1]: And the last round was a four-day workshop in the institute.
[Guest 1]: And when I met the people who were there at the workshop, they'd all come with a lot of
[Guest 1]: experience and a lot of varied experiences.
[Guest 1]: Somebody had worked with Naya Theatre for years, somebody was in the Sriram Repertory.
[Guest 1]: And I had had no acting experience since LSR, so I hadn't done a performance for the last
[Guest 1]: three years before I went to that four-day workshop.
[Guest 1]: And I was very shy, and it was very difficult for me to really do anything at that workshop.
[Guest 1]: And I didn't think I would make it, but I did.
[Guest 1]: There were 20 people who were selected, and for some reason, I was a part of that list.
[Guest 1]: Once I joined the institute, I think that's when it possibly became different for Mukul
[Guest 1]: and me.
[Guest 1]: About six months into the institute, I knew that this is what I wanted to do for a really,
[Guest 1]: really long time.
[Guest 1]: And I wasn't willing to accept even for a single day that it wouldn't work out, you
[Guest 1]: know.
[Guest 1]: So I came to Bombay with that momentum, and really with a desire to get as much work as
[Guest 2]: I could.
[Guest 2]: No, I just want to say, I think, you know, Rasika just said that it was different for
[Guest 2]: her and me in that sense, that she was very clear she wanted to be an actor.
[Guest 2]: And I have to say that I think, when I met Rasika, I think her sort of focus at wanting
[Guest 2]: to be an actor had a big influence on me.
[Guest 2]: Because I was, until then, you know, sort of dabbling in multiple things, like we talked
[Guest 2]: about.
[Guest 2]: And you said, you know, you did something similar.
[Guest 2]: I think it also comes from having, you know, varied interests.
[Guest 2]: You know, I played poker for a while.
[Guest 2]: You know, not that I ever thought that that's a career, but you know, I took it very seriously
[Guest 2]: for some time.
[Guest 2]: I even started with an ex-colleague from Lehman while I was in Bombay.
[Guest 2]: We started a firm that was looking for investing opportunities in the equity markets in India.
[Guest 2]: And we started a firm, and we were doing that work.
[Guest 2]: So I kind of dabbled in multiple things.
[Guest 2]: And I sort of liked that as well.
[Guest 2]: And I have to say that, you know, seeing Rasika's single-minded focus was also an influence
[Guest 2]: because I also realized that, you know, if you want to get ahead in any one career, you
[Guest 2]: kind of have to push yourself somewhere.
[Guest 2]: And I think somewhere the lack of that drive or focus was affecting me and probably also
[Guest 2]: helped me say, okay, you know, I really need to narrow down a few things here and focus
[Amit Varma]: in one direction.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And Rasika, you were talking about your sort of time at LSR where, you know, you felt that
[Amit Varma]: all these people around me are so accomplished, they've been doing theater for so long and
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And the thought that kind of struck me in my, you know, follow up question is from there.
[Amit Varma]: And one thought that struck me was that then it's sort of interesting that through that
[Amit Varma]: journey that, you know, you are sort of where you are today, where you are, you know, fairly
[Amit Varma]: accomplished actress and so on and no doubt, you know, many of those other people haven't
[Amit Varma]: quite managed to make the same journey.
[Amit Varma]: And my question from there is, and no doubt a lot of this is, of course, you know, things
[Amit Varma]: that happen to you and serendipity and luck and so on, there's no denying that.
[Amit Varma]: But equally, just thinking aloud, do you think the fact that you had these sort of unusual
[Amit Varma]: backgrounds where you've done other things, where you've looked at life from a variety
[Amit Varma]: of different angles, do you think that sort of made a difference in how you looked at
[Amit Varma]: acting itself?
[Amit Varma]: Because I would imagine that a lot of people who come into acting and want to be actors
[Amit Varma]: want to do nothing but that.
[Amit Varma]: That's a whole kind of worldview when you sort of from the time you're a kid, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that's what you want to do.
[Amit Varma]: And you're in love with the industry and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But in your case, it seems in both your cases, it seems that number one, you're coming from
[Amit Varma]: a variety of other places, you've both done maths and, you know, Mukul might even have
[Amit Varma]: foreseen the 2008 financial crisis coming if you were studying Fannie Mae and Fannie
[Amit Varma]: Mac.
[Amit Varma]: And we can't blame it on you.
[Amit Varma]: And he didn't foresee it, says Jessica.
[Guest 1]: A lot of friends give him credit for that.
[Guest 1]: And I can tell you, he didn't.
[Guest 2]: No, I say I didn't.
[Guest 2]: I say very openly, of course, I didn't see that kind of crash.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you knew there was something wrong happening.
[Guest 2]: And that I can talk about.
[Guest 2]: There are fun stories there.
[Guest 2]: But the kind of crash, no, no question.
[Guest 2]: I wouldn't have believed that Lehman would have gone bankrupt.
[Amit Varma]: But do you think the sort of different perspectives and the different Nazarias sort of added something
[Amit Varma]: extra to what you were as actors and maybe added something to your journey?
[Guest 2]: No, I think it's hard for me to answer that question, first of all, you know, a perspective
[Guest 2]: about your own life or to say what influenced you is very hard to answer.
[Guest 2]: But I think all actors draw from their own experiences, right?
[Guest 2]: You have to draw from your own experiences of what you've done, people you've met, etc.
[Guest 2]: But that's not to say that people who haven't necessarily had other careers haven't really
[Guest 2]: had other experiences to draw from.
[Guest 2]: So I'm not sure that I would, you know, agree entirely with that.
[Guest 2]: I think, you know, everybody draws from, I mean, some people come from, you know, troubled
[Guest 2]: childhoods, and maybe that helps them in some scene.
[Guest 2]: But it's not to say that, you know, somebody else, you know, may or may not be able to
[Guest 2]: do that.
[Guest 1]: So, yeah, all your experiences add up.
[Guest 2]: I don't think you necessarily need multiple careers.
[Guest 1]: That's my simple point of view.
[Guest 1]: I sort of agree with that, because I, in fact, my interest in this career started because
[Guest 1]: I realized when I was at FDI, that no experience of mine will not be able to help me become
[Guest 1]: a better actor, you know.
[Guest 1]: So it's just about how you use that experience in your work.
[Guest 1]: And that is, that's the craft of it, you know.
[Guest 1]: So it's, it's not about going and looking out for newer experiences, or varied experiences.
[Guest 1]: It's about how you, how a memory of any experience stays with you, and how you sort of mold that
[Guest 1]: into a particular role and the choices you make along that way, along that path.
[Guest 1]: So I think that's, that's the thing about it.
[Amit Varma]: I want to kind of explore a couple of dichotomies, now, sort of two very separate things sort
[Amit Varma]: of coming together.
[Amit Varma]: And one is a dichotomy of sensibilities, like, you know, you've mentioned how watching a
[Amit Varma]: scene of Pathar Panchali made an impression on you, and then no doubt watching great world
[Amit Varma]: cinema at FDI, I would also have done the same.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, Mukul was at Lee Strasberg, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that, for example, when we compare Bollywood, or we compare Indian
[Amit Varma]: mainstream cinema to world cinema, we just make a category error.
[Amit Varma]: Because these are just two completely different art forms, even though they look similar.
[Amit Varma]: Because your sensibilities are different, you're aiming for different things, there
[Amit Varma]: is a different notion of realism, and, you know, how you should tell a story and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, I think some of this would also then reflect in the kind of acting that is
[Amit Varma]: done.
[Amit Varma]: Like many of our Bollywood big gudges, and of course, I won't take any names, but many
[Amit Varma]: of our superstars of the past, if you look at them from the Western prism of what good
[Amit Varma]: acting is, it would just seem like they are ridiculously hamming it up, or they're overacting
[Amit Varma]: or over performing, and it's very performative.
[Amit Varma]: It's emoting, as that unique Indian word goes, I don't think anyone outside India uses the
[Amit Varma]: word emoting.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, what has sort of happened, coinciding with the, you know, the trajectory
[Amit Varma]: of your careers is that there is that other sensibility also coming into play where we
[Amit Varma]: do in Indian cinema today, and Indian web series today and entertainment today, see
[Amit Varma]: a lot of acting, which even from a Western sensibility also would be considered outstanding,
[Amit Varma]: including some of the work that you guys have done.
[Amit Varma]: So how was it navigating this?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, first of all, like, what is your personal philosophy and approach towards
[Amit Varma]: acting?
[Amit Varma]: How do you view acting?
[Amit Varma]: And how do you view cinema?
[Amit Varma]: And how do you define good cinema?
[Amit Varma]: And then secondly, and I'm assuming that a certain part of that at least is influenced
[Amit Varma]: by these global sensibilities.
[Amit Varma]: And then secondly, you are in Bombay trying to make a living where not everybody shares
[Amit Varma]: that sensibility.
[Amit Varma]: And when you, you know, go to a set to act, the expectations might be, you know, your
[Amit Varma]: expectations and that of whoever you're working for, might be quite different, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: in your respective filmographies, you've worked with people who share that more kind of modern
[Amit Varma]: sensibility.
[Amit Varma]: But how do you sort of think about this and navigate this?
[Amit Varma]: And does the awareness of this and you know, play a part?
[Guest 1]: I think that first, I don't, while I was influenced by a lot of world cinema, and I got an opportunity
[Guest 1]: to watch a lot of films at FDI that many people didn't, and I also got an opportunity to watch
[Guest 1]: them on film, which I'm still very proud of, not on DVDs or digital.
[Guest 1]: So while that was very exciting, I think that just by, by growing up in this country, Bollywood
[Guest 1]: is a big influence in your life, you know, and you cannot deny it, even if you want to,
[Guest 1]: you know, and I never wanted to, I embraced it as much as I was as mesmerized by Sridevi
[Guest 1]: as I was by Isabella Huppert, you know, so I did not judge either.
[Guest 1]: I thought that both were different experiences.
[Guest 1]: As far as your position in a film is concerned, as an actor, you're in a very strange sort
[Guest 1]: of situation.
[Guest 1]: And actually, a lot of people are in that situation or in a film set.
[Guest 1]: So what's very exciting to me, and also very irritating to me very many times is that filmmaking
[Guest 1]: is a very, very, it's a deeply personal process, but also very collaborative one.
[Guest 1]: And as an actor, you don't have much agency, you know, you are pretty much at the mercy
[Guest 1]: of a director, cinematographer, art director, your co actor, so many things which are making
[Guest 1]: this moment or the scene happen for you.
[Guest 1]: But fortunately or unfortunately, you're the face of it, you know, so you're sort of put
[Guest 1]: in this spot where everybody's abilities have to sort of sink in together for you to be
[Guest 1]: able to do something.
[Guest 1]: So it's actually a very strange situation to be in, I totally love being in that situation,
[Guest 1]: because I love giving into somebody else's vision, because it takes responsibility off
[Guest 1]: my shoulders.
[Guest 1]: And at the same time, I am a fairly important part of making that vision happen.
[Guest 1]: So I'm very happy to function like that.
[Guest 1]: So I enjoy this position, but it can be very scary.
[Guest 1]: And sometimes this position is scary to me when I can totally live a moment, but I don't
[Guest 1]: know how it's going to be put together.
[Guest 1]: So very often the politics of it is something that I get scared about, I feel like, will
[Guest 1]: the politics of this film be in sync with mine or not?
[Guest 1]: So when I agree to do a project or not, it's my first concern is the politics of this project,
[Guest 1]: thinking that, so the politics of my character might not be in sync with mine, which is great,
[Guest 1]: in fact, because I'd love to play, for example, a right wing troll, you know, but and just
[Guest 1]: to understand how that mind works.
[Guest 1]: And when you're working on a role, you have to, you can't be judging your own character,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: So it would really require a lot of empathy and expansion of the heart to be able to understand
[Guest 1]: somebody who is completely different from you.
[Guest 1]: But it's important to me that the overall politics of what I've agreed to work on is
[Guest 1]: something that I, is something that is aligned with mine.
[Guest 1]: So that's the situation that you are in as an actor.
[Guest 1]: So that's one thing that I always look out for when, you know, collaborating with somebody.
[Guest 1]: Also the sensibility of a project is something that I find you have indications for it, like
[Guest 1]: somebody can narrate their story to you, you can see their previous work, and you can get
[Guest 1]: a sense of where they're coming from.
[Guest 1]: But really, it's a gamble, you know, how it turns out could be very, very different from
[Guest 1]: what you had imagined.
[Guest 1]: So as an actor, you're always in that position, you know, because you've lost, you don't have
[Guest 1]: any control after you've shot for the film, and largely a lot of work on the film is about
[Guest 1]: the editing is about the sound, and all of that, that's like a whole other thing that's
[Guest 1]: going to happen to your work, and you have no control to say in the matter, nobody shows
[Guest 1]: the film to you till it's done.
[Guest 1]: I mean, you might see clips of it at the dub, and all of that, but you don't have control
[Guest 1]: over that side of things, you know.
[Guest 1]: So I mean, yeah, those are the things that concern me while I'm working with somebody.
[Guest 1]: And sensibility ka aap andaza laga sakte ho, but you can't really have surety on how this
[Guest 1]: project is going to turn out.
[Guest 1]: So sometimes when I watch something that I've worked on, I feel that maybe artistically,
[Guest 1]: it's not aligning with my sensibility, maybe the politics is fine, but, you know, it's
[Guest 1]: not really aligning with my sensibilities like that.
[Guest 1]: It's not what I'd imagined it to be, but sometimes I'm pleasantly surprised also.
[Guest 1]: I mean, when I saw Delhi Crime, I was very proud of what the director, the editor and
[Guest 1]: the cinematographer had done, because in spite of the fact that I'd read the script, and
[Guest 1]: I was, I was very assured that Richie's politics were totally in sync with mine.
[Guest 1]: And so were his sensibilities were of a very high standard.
[Guest 1]: But I was very moved by how they managed to humanize these rapists, you know, who through
[Guest 1]: the whole series you're, and just that's just in the lensing, the editing, how you've lensed
[Guest 1]: the character, how long you've held the shot on them, and how you how you've lit them,
[Guest 1]: you know.
[Guest 1]: So it's just about those things.
[Guest 1]: And I was so moved by that.
[Guest 1]: So in this case, this particular case, what I watched, superseded my expectations of the
[Guest 1]: sensibility of the project.
[Guest 1]: But there have been other cases in Mirzapur, for example, I felt like the intent was very
[Guest 1]: good, and the writing was very good.
[Guest 1]: But I felt like the way we visualize a woman who is, who's acknowledged as a sexual being
[Guest 1]: is still, we still have a very long way to go.
[Guest 1]: Because I think our visuals are still very sexual.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, in fact, what I felt when I watched Mirzapur as well, Mukul.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, this is a very difficult question you've asked.
[Guest 2]: I mean, this whole notion, and I think it's something that I think about, you know, because
[Guest 2]: as an actor, you always wonder, what is good acting and what is not good acting, you know,
[Guest 2]: you read stuff that other people have said about it, because obviously, if you're doing
[Guest 2]: something, you want to do it really well.
[Guest 2]: And again, you know, it's also very personal, because you're all always influenced by what
[Unknown]: you have liked and not liked.
[Guest 2]: You know, I think at the end of the day, just like a director tells stories that he or she
[Guest 2]: has wants to tell, much like that, you want to do performances that you have enjoyed watching.
[Guest 2]: And that changes actually, over time, and it's very hard to quantify it and say, this
[Guest 2]: is what is good.
[Guest 2]: And this is what is bad.
[Guest 2]: I mean, growing up, I actually haven't had as much exposure to world cinema, I have watched
[Guest 2]: a lot of Bollywood, some things I have loved, some things I've hated.
[Guest 2]: Even Western films I've seen, I've seen a lot more of the Hollywood blockbusters, than
[Guest 2]: you know, seeing a lot of foreign language films, which is more something that you know,
[Guest 2]: one is more exposed to now, but I had it.
[Guest 2]: So a lot of things are influenced by, and even within the realm of what you watch, I
[Guest 2]: feel, you know, there are things that you like more and things you like less, to me,
[Guest 2]: a good performance is something that moves me in any way.
[Guest 2]: And if I shut off, you know, and I say, no, this is fake, I don't buy this, or I don't
[Guest 2]: believe it, then that's not really necessarily a good performance.
[Guest 2]: But that changes.
[Guest 2]: If I think back to some of the TV shows I watched in the 80s, you know, there's some
[Guest 2]: shows that we loved and thought they were great.
[Guest 2]: And you go back and watch them today.
[Guest 2]: And a lot of them are unwatchable to me, right.
[Guest 2]: And I think it's a function of having seen other things, you know, so I wouldn't put
[Guest 2]: it's a classic problem of high art versus low art.
[Guest 2]: What is high art?
[Guest 2]: What is low art?
[Guest 2]: How do you, how do you, you know, want to put a line on it, but I think the more you
[Guest 2]: end up seeing, and it's great that there's so much competition, and people are influenced
[Guest 2]: by things that happen across the world, both ways, and the more you watch, you're drawn
[Guest 2]: to things that then, you know, take it to a slightly higher standard, then something
[Guest 2]: that you liked earlier may not, you know, hold weight as much.
[Guest 2]: And it's also a hard question to answer.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's something what is over the top, what is not, you know, sometimes the genre
[Guest 2]: of a film, I mean, was chapter over the top, because, you know, there's a lot of slapstick
[Guest 2]: stuff he's doing.
[Guest 2]: But that within that genre, it works, you know, it works.
[Guest 2]: And that makes you laugh.
[Guest 2]: And that makes you feel okay, this is great.
[Guest 2]: And you can watch it even today.
[Guest 2]: So it's, it's very hard to sometimes, and it's a constant struggle, it's a good question,
[Guest 2]: because it's something that you're never sure of.
[Guest 2]: And when you take on a new project, you're trying to visualize it.
[Guest 2]: I mean, very often, it's, you know, you need to read the whole script to understand what
[Guest 2]: is the vision of what is the, you know, what is the genre is going to fit into what is
[Guest 2]: the style this is going to be to understand, you know, what your role in it is, because
[Guest 2]: it has to fit within that.
[Guest 2]: And like Jessica said, it's very, it's very difficult, because sometimes you don't know
[Guest 2]: what the director wants.
[Guest 2]: And the better ones are those who are able to, you know, communicate that to you, you
[Guest 2]: know, where that you understand, you know, then what is the style and, and at some level,
[Guest 2]: you'd like to do work that you would like watching, you know, because then it's easier
[Guest 2]: to sort of, you know, fit into that.
[Guest 2]: And it could be across genres, you could do something very slapstick.
[Guest 2]: And that's great.
[Guest 2]: You could do something that's, you know, totally different.
[Guest 2]: But as long as it's something you like doing, I'm not saying we always managed to do that,
[Guest 2]: because while you're working, you end up doing a lot of other things.
[Guest 2]: And plus, you sometimes don't know how things are going to turn out.
[Guest 2]: So that's separate.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, I think it's a very difficult question to answer, because and it's constantly changing,
[Guest 2]: you know, what is good acting, I see some performance somewhere.
[Guest 2]: And now, of course, we have so many shows from across the world that are just coming
[Guest 2]: into our living room without making any effort.
[Guest 2]: And you know, you see something and you think, oh, this is interesting how someone has done
[Guest 2]: something.
[Guest 2]: And it's sometimes different from what, you know, you might have thought works earlier.
[Guest 2]: So yeah, you know, what's good and bad, I think is a function of what you're drawn to.
[Guest 2]: And that also keeps changing.
[Guest 2]: You know, I think what we may, you know, it's possible that what we think is good acting
[Guest 2]: today, you know, 30 years down the line, someone will say this was very mediocre.
[Guest 2]: It's possible.
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: And that's very perceptive.
[Amit Varma]: You know, to me, like you said, it's not just about a difference between high art and low
[Amit Varma]: art, but taste change over time.
[Amit Varma]: Like, again, like you have tried watching the shows of the 1980s, when one gets him
[Amit Varma]: on YouTube, like Yeh Jo Hai Zindagi and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then you wonder about yourself, ki yaar, I used to like that.
[Guest 2]: What was like?
[Guest 2]: So Gudiyaan was always this soap, but Yeh Jo Hai Zindagi was the one, right?
[Guest 2]: Because I remember laughing as a kid when I saw it and it was one of the better shows.
[Guest 2]: And I watched it again.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it is truly unwatchable for me right now.
[Guest 2]: And I also feel that that's why when we diss a lot of TV soaps that are on right now in
[Guest 2]: the last decade, it's wholly possible that they're being watched by a whole lot of people
[Guest 2]: who have got access to cable for the first time in the last 10 or 20 years.
[Guest 2]: And once they start seeing better things, they will also no longer like it.
[Guest 2]: You know, it's just that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the thought struck me yesterday, I was kind of out on the road and I saw this
[Amit Varma]: very old vintage car, which looked so incredibly ugly and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then I realized that, wait a minute, when I was in my early 20s in Bombay, the Mitsubishi
[Amit Varma]: Lancer was the most beautiful freaking beast you could aspire to, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I saw one of those models a couple of days back on the street.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, my God, what an ugly thing, wait a minute, this is that, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: then you wonder whether the kind of work that you do today will also change.
[Amit Varma]: I was sort of, you know, what you were saying, what, you know, Rasika was speaking about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the approaches to acting, I was reminded of an old episode I did on the art
[Amit Varma]: of translation with Aruna Vasina, who's translated like 40 books from Bengali to English.
[Amit Varma]: And he said something very interesting there, where he said that when we were speaking about
[Amit Varma]: languages and, you know, thinking in one language and writing in the other, and he made the
[Amit Varma]: point that Indians, because we are so multilingual, are very good at code shifting.
[Amit Varma]: So we can automatically effortlessly shift from, you know, being natural in one language
[Amit Varma]: to being natural in another language.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that in some way, these different schools of acting, as it were, are
[Amit Varma]: also like different languages.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not that you necessarily have to speak one or the other language, but you can
[Amit Varma]: just adapt whichever one and even mix them up as required.
[Amit Varma]: Does that kind of make any kind of sense?
[Guest 2]: No, I mean, I'm also confused about the schools of acting in the sense, I haven't, you know,
[Guest 2]: like, I haven't studied formal theatre, except at Least Strasbourg, where I studied and they
[Guest 2]: were very fixed on the method, you know, and that was their big thing that, you know, you
[Guest 2]: have to follow the method.
[Guest 2]: But even within their, you know, and there was the opposition to the Stella Adler school,
[Guest 2]: which was, you know, not a few blocks away, that that's a different style.
[Guest 2]: And you have this, even within the method, I found my personal view was a lot of the
[Guest 2]: teachers were teaching us understood the method to be very different.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, they would interpret it and they would have their own teaching styles.
[Guest 2]: And but the one thing that I think stuck with me from what a lot of people have said, and
[Guest 2]: teachers said, and otherwise also, you know, other theatre people you work with, is whatever
[Guest 2]: works for you, something someone tells you works for you, and you hold on to it and something
[Guest 2]: someone else says works for you.
[Guest 2]: And yeah, I think I think that's, that's it for me, actually.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so you know, the thing is, what's exciting to me about my work is that there's no one
[Guest 1]: way to do it.
[Guest 1]: So in one, and there's no one basic set of rules that you have to follow either.
[Guest 1]: So you change it up as you go along.
[Guest 1]: And so I wouldn't say that what I'm doing in one film could probably even qualify as
[Guest 1]: being called a language, you know, because there are the rules are not so set, you know,
[Guest 1]: it's actually very experiential, and it's actually very, something that I improvised
[Guest 1]: along the way.
[Guest 1]: So yeah, your work on another project automatically does become different.
[Guest 1]: But neither of them would be something that you would be able to use again somewhere else.
[Guest 1]: The other experience will be an entirely different experience.
[Guest 1]: And what I'm interested in, earlier on in my career was I was like, anytime anybody
[Guest 1]: would ask me, so what is your process, and I was like, my process is that I'm looking
[Guest 1]: for a process.
[Guest 1]: And now I after having worked for around 12 years, I've realized that there can be no
[Guest 1]: one process for yourself.
[Guest 1]: And that's the beauty of it.
[Guest 1]: And I don't want there to be that one process.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, there can be techniques that you rely on on a day where you're not completely there,
[Guest 1]: where you're not having a very good day as an actor, where you're not able to be there
[Guest 1]: for that part.
[Guest 1]: And that moment.
[Guest 1]: So there are techniques that you can fall back on.
[Guest 1]: But there is no one way to do it.
[Guest 1]: And there shouldn't be is my assessment of it so far, I might change my mind next month.
[Guest 1]: But this is how I feel about it today.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's pretty insightful.
[Amit Varma]: And if I try to sort of process it in my language, what you're saying is that look, we have a
[Amit Varma]: set of tactics that we can use in any situation, but there's not necessarily one strategy,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that can differ according to the task.
[Amit Varma]: But then my follow up question, Rasika, would be that, even if there is no one process per
[Amit Varma]: se, and it differs from project to project, is there then a set of values or an acting
[Amit Varma]: ethic or an approach towards the characters that you play that is common, something common
[Amit Varma]: there that you, you know, maybe the way that you approach the characters or approach your
[Amit Varma]: role or just the ethic that you bring to the whole craft that is common and that, you know,
[Guest 1]: that is common to everything.
[Guest 1]: There are certain ethics that I have for myself.
[Guest 1]: But I don't know if anybody else follows them.
[Guest 1]: You know, I think if you I don't know if Mukul does, if you ask any other actor, I don't
[Guest 1]: know, they might have their own set.
[Guest 1]: But some of the things that I am very, very pakka about, and I don't let go of, one is
[Guest 1]: that I will never, ever in my life, tell my co actor what to do.
[Guest 1]: Never.
[Guest 1]: In fact, the beauty of a moment between two actors is the uncertainty of it and the many,
[Guest 1]: the number of things that it can be.
[Guest 1]: And the beautiful moment between two actors is when you can't put your finger on the emotion.
[Guest 1]: Because you can only put your finger on the emotion when somebody is emoting.
[Guest 1]: And that, in my opinion, is not good acting, you know, good acting is when you when there's
[Guest 1]: confusion and there's a lot of so many other things and when there is when you can't put
[Guest 1]: your finger on one single emotion, you know, and there are so many things at play.
[Guest 1]: And the moment you try and if you instruct your co actor on what to do, you're basically
[Guest 1]: asking them to do something which is convenient to you.
[Guest 1]: And therefore, you're removing the possibility of magic, you are at the altar of efficiency,
[Guest 1]: you know.
[Guest 1]: So because you're so insecure or nervous about trying to get a moment right and trying to
[Guest 1]: get it executed efficiently, you're losing out the possibility of magic and you know,
[Guest 1]: few times that magic happens in the time between action and cut, it is so precious that you
[Guest 1]: feel like my years of struggle and standing in Oshiwara outside studios and waiting for
[Guest 1]: auditions with my makeup melting has been worth it.
[Guest 1]: So that's the beauty of that moment is so, so much that it makes me feel sad when people
[Guest 1]: let go of it.
[Guest 1]: When I see people letting go of it, I'm like, oh my god, you guys just like lost the opportunity
[Guest 1]: to have a moment which was something that nobody would have thought out, or logically
[Guest 1]: understood or rehearsed, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So are there specific moments of magic that you remember from your career like this, which
[Amit Varma]: made you feel that I need more of this, for example, you've referred to the penultimate
[Amit Varma]: scene and Kissa with Irfan, which you, you know, you went and reshot and you said you
[Amit Varma]: did eight takes, and they were also magical.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm presuming that was kind of one of those.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, you know, is this something that you started with?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it something that you gradually discovered?
[Amit Varma]: Are there these moments of magic that you can point to and say that, you know, yes,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that moment happened, because I let it happen, because I didn't try to sort
[Amit Varma]: of drive the process too hard?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so Kissa was the first time it happened, as I remember it.
[Guest 1]: And that's why it was so special.
[Guest 1]: And it was also, Kissa was, in one sense, the perfect film for an actor.
[Guest 1]: The environment allowed you to thrive as a performer, you know, the director was somebody
[Guest 1]: who was very sensitive to actors, protected us from every other thing happening on the
[Guest 1]: set.
[Guest 1]: The bunch of co-actors that I was working with, I mean, I had a co-actor like Irfan,
[Guest 1]: like Dilotma, like Kiska, all people who are very accomplished and very much on the same
[Guest 1]: page as I am about trying to make a scene work, you know.
[Guest 1]: So in that sense, Kissa was like a perfect experience and not the kind of experience
[Guest 1]: that you find on other projects.
[Guest 1]: But as I had more and more experience, I realized that I started enjoying fighting everything
[Guest 1]: to make my moment work, you know, that became my thrill.
[Guest 1]: Like, I was like, okay, all of you can yell and scream around me, but I will still find
[Guest 1]: my moment while I'm shooting, because that is what will remain.
[Guest 1]: Nobody will remember that the light was not working, and that the sun was going to go
[Guest 1]: down in two minutes, and you had only three minutes to get this shot done.
[Guest 1]: And that your co-actor forgot their line, and the million other things that can go wrong
[Guest 1]: on shoot, and that people were yelling and screaming at each other.
[Guest 1]: So I've realized earlier, it used to really bother me, and I would really try and find
[Guest 1]: my focus and concentration and go away and try and, you know, be like, guys, please don't
[Guest 1]: interfere with my work and don't make this not work for me.
[Guest 1]: But now I will just stand in the middle of all of it, and I will say, throw anything
[Guest 1]: at me, and I will still try and make that shot work for myself.
[Guest 1]: The other thing that I do, besides one of the other rules that I have for myself, is
[Guest 1]: I will never play out a moment that is in the script before.
[Guest 1]: I'm very wary of playing it away before the shot happens.
[Guest 1]: So I'll read it a number of times.
[Guest 1]: I might think different things about it every time I read it, every time I begin to read
[Guest 1]: the scene, I might approach it completely differently.
[Guest 1]: But I will never decide that this is how I'm going to play this moment.
[Guest 1]: But what I will do is I will equip my character with a world.
[Guest 1]: I will make my character have a world that they exist in.
[Guest 1]: So I will do things around that character, which need not necessarily even feature in
[Guest 1]: the film.
[Guest 1]: So that maybe no one will even know that I have done this work.
[Guest 1]: But somewhere it will help, and it's also the most fun way to work on a character.
[Guest 1]: Otherwise it's really boring, I don't know how else to do it.
[Guest 1]: But basically, for example, for Kista, I read a lot of Punjabi poetry, I listened to a lot
[Guest 1]: of Punjabi music, which ranged from Punjabi MC to Reshma.
[Guest 1]: It was that varied.
[Guest 1]: And I just thought that, because the character I was playing was somebody who was very free
[Guest 1]: and one with nature.
[Guest 1]: You know, she's like this tribal Punjabi girl and so I felt like I needed to, maybe these
[Guest 1]: things would help.
[Guest 1]: I don't know if they did or didn't or how exactly they helped.
[Guest 1]: But I felt like I was providing a world for Neeli, this character in Kista, to live in.
[Guest 1]: Now, I was not deciding that I will do this in this scene.
[Guest 1]: And that's something that I've tried to follow through the work that I've done.
[Guest 1]: And that, I believe, leads to magical moments.
[Guest 1]: And to give you another example of a magical moment was this moment in Delhi Crime, where
[Guest 1]: I play Neeti Singh, who is a probationary officer, like they call it in the police.
[Guest 1]: She's finished her training at the academy and is in the six months field training.
[Guest 1]: And she's found herself in this job that the DCP has given her.
[Guest 1]: And there are protests at India Gate and she's asked to go manage those.
[Guest 1]: And while I was shooting for that, and in the script at this time, she's been assigned
[Guest 1]: to be at the hospital with the family and the girl.
[Guest 1]: So she's been there and she's been up for three nights.
[Guest 1]: And by right now, the character is in this space where all she wants is, she wants the
[Guest 1]: girl to be okay.
[Guest 1]: That's all she's focused, at least that's how I understood it at that point.
[Guest 1]: And then we are shooting for this scene, and there are these protesters and there are these
[Guest 1]: bunch of junior artists who've been organized.
[Guest 1]: And there's complete chaos on set that day, because it's a very hard shot to pull off.
[Guest 1]: And the moment you have many junior artists, things become very difficult production wise,
[Guest 1]: and everybody's sort of wondering what to do.
[Guest 1]: And there's a lot of chaos that you have to find moments within.
[Guest 1]: So I remember she's holding the shield and she comes out.
[Guest 1]: And on that day of shoot, I came out and I looked at these protesters and they were protesting
[Guest 1]: against the police.
[Guest 1]: And I felt so bad.
[Guest 1]: I just felt shattered, I said, no, we worked so hard for them.
[Guest 1]: And they're not realizing that all I'm trying to make this world better for them, but they
[Guest 1]: don't understand it.
[Guest 1]: And I felt really hurt to the point of, you know, almost feeling teary.
[Guest 1]: And I hadn't realized that that's how, I hadn't thought that this is what is going to happen
[Guest 1]: to me in that scene.
[Guest 1]: And that was not even the mandate of the scene.
[Guest 1]: And that's not even anything that's written in to the scene.
[Guest 1]: And I don't even know if it shows on screen or it doesn't, but it was a big moment for
[Guest 1]: me.
[Guest 1]: That's when I felt like I had begun to believe in the world that I had tried to create.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I had a question for later, but it seems a natural follow up question
[Amit Varma]: now that you've sort of mentioned this moment.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask it now, which is that, you know, does immersing yourself in the role also then
[Amit Varma]: change the person you are and the way you view the world?
[Amit Varma]: For example, a couple of examples which came to mind from what you've said about your work
[Amit Varma]: earlier is one of course this, that you felt that Delhi was more of a safe zone because
[Amit Varma]: you felt more empathetic towards the police once you did the film.
[Amit Varma]: And the other was you also pointed out that how, you know, playing the role that you did
[Amit Varma]: in Manto made you more empathetic towards, you know, your naniji and women of the past
[Amit Varma]: on whom you would otherwise have been judgmental, or when you were sort of a fiery feminist
[Amit Varma]: in college.
[Amit Varma]: And so do roles kind of change the way that, you know, you view the world and in some way
[Amit Varma]: change you as well?
[Guest 1]: So usually, I actually feel nervous to romanticize the idea of, you know, being immersed in a
[Guest 1]: role and not being able to come out of it or it affecting you in a big way.
[Guest 1]: But I have to say that it does.
[Guest 1]: I have to accept that it does.
[Guest 1]: And taking the example of Delhi crime, I think it did make me very empathetic to the Delhi
[Guest 1]: police and especially this time, this year in February, I felt very uncomfortable with
[Guest 1]: that empathy, you know, and I didn't know what to do with that.
[Guest 1]: It was almost like the memory of that experience remained and so the empathy with the police
[Guest 1]: remained.
[Guest 1]: But then I was again seeing things happening from the perspective of a civilian.
[Guest 1]: And what I was seeing was not making me feel like I should feel any empathy, but yet there
[Guest 1]: was some empathy.
[Guest 1]: So that dichotomy was making me very uncomfortable.
[Guest 1]: And I guess that was proof of the fact that it does stay with you for a while.
[Guest 1]: But I can't really tell how long it does or does it go away or not or what.
[Guest 1]: And you know, I've listened to a lot of actors talk about similar experiences and they've
[Guest 1]: all and what seems to me, seems to be the commonality between what they're saying is
[Guest 1]: that they don't know where it comes up again, you know, for example, Nicole Kidman was talking
[Guest 1]: about her role in Big Little Lies, and there's that abusive relationship and which was very,
[Guest 1]: very beautifully done in the series.
[Guest 1]: And she said, I didn't know that I was so angry because of playing that role that one
[Guest 1]: day when I went back from shoot, I took something and shattered the glass in the bathroom.
[Guest 1]: She said, I am not that person, I don't do this, but this remained with me and I didn't
[Guest 1]: realize that this was happening to me.
[Guest 1]: And I think when I shot for Hamid also, months after I'd finished shooting for Hamid, I remember
[Guest 1]: I was telling Mukul the story of how I watched this documentary in which Parveena Hangar
[Guest 1]: is talking to the Satya Lady and both are people whose children, whose sons had gone
[Guest 1]: missing.
[Guest 1]: They were both 15 years old and I was recounting this moment.
[Guest 1]: And I didn't realize that it had been with me for a while and I was in tears and it had
[Guest 1]: been about four or five months and I hadn't realized that I was still carrying some of
[Guest 1]: the grief from there.
[Guest 1]: But you know, I still, I feel so scared to even admit to this because I feel that as
[Guest 1]: actors, if you become so conscious of these moments and if you try and seek, if you try
[Guest 1]: and then recreate magic, it's not going to happen.
[Guest 1]: So I try as much as possible to not remember this, you know, so that I can be open to ways
[Guest 1]: of achieving magical moments like these, can be open to new ways of achieving magical moments
[Guest 1]: like these.
[Guest 1]: And that I don't then go back to the same way that I did it in, that I happened to find
[Guest 1]: it in Hamid or happened to find it in Delhi Crime or happened to find it in Kissa.
[Amit Varma]: And Mokul, I have a sort of related question for you, which is like a really weird question,
[Amit Varma]: which I can ask only you.
[Amit Varma]: And you'll realize why when I come to it, which is that in my experience as a poker
[Amit Varma]: player, I often realized that and non poker players often don't realize the highs and
[Amit Varma]: lows of emotions that are involved in playing poker, I've often found that poker can really
[Amit Varma]: bring out the worst elements of your character.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, it's a process of self discovery, where you'll act in particular ways where
[Amit Varma]: you're on severe tilt and all of that and later you'll look back and you'll take a step
[Amit Varma]: outside of yourself and you'll kind of realize that shit, you know, and you learn a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about yourself also, when you do that in those low moments, and even the high moments,
[Amit Varma]: where you can overreact to that as well.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that as an actor, part of what you're doing when you're immersing yourself
[Amit Varma]: in a role is that you are taking a step out of yourself to that meta level where you're
[Amit Varma]: sort of, you know, as you're immersing yourself in a character, you're also taking that step
[Amit Varma]: back and looking at sort of the motivations and the emotions and the way this person would
[Amit Varma]: behave and the way all of that plays.
[Amit Varma]: So just in terms of sort of self awareness, does the acting process and I don't know if
[Amit Varma]: you share my feelings about poker in this context, but does the acting process does
[Amit Varma]: it lead to at some level, a sort of greater self awareness of your own behaviors and motivations
[Amit Varma]: and even your own performative actions as it were?
[Guest 2]: There's a lot there.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, I think this whole thing of I'm going to address first your comparison
[Guest 2]: with you know, those moments in poker when you feel you're in there, and you're sort
[Guest 2]: of observing yourself from the outside.
[Guest 2]: With acting that happens, but you try and shut it out, because the minute you start
[Guest 2]: being aware of, of that whole of that, then you might lose that moment also, you know,
[Guest 2]: if you're very conscious of, because sometimes, I think, I would use a different word for
[Guest 2]: what Jessica said, you know, when she talked about magic, I say, sometimes you surprise
[Guest 2]: yourself, you know, sometimes something happens, and you surprise yourself, and, and that feels
[Guest 2]: really great.
[Guest 2]: But if you think about it too much, sometimes that actually takes away or ruins the whole
[Guest 2]: thing, because then you're trying to analyze why that may have happened or what you did.
[Guest 2]: And that kind of destroys it.
[Guest 2]: And I think that might relate, I don't know if you relate to that on the poker table.
[Guest 2]: But you know, sometimes if you're, sometimes you're just in the zone, right, you're doing,
[Guest 2]: you're playing really well, you're figuring things out.
[Guest 2]: And if you try and analyze it too much as to what am I doing and trying to impose rules
[Guest 2]: on it, you might just shatter that whole thing for yourself.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it might work better when you're on tilt to say, I need to get out of the zone.
[Guest 2]: But that's what I feel.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's, it's, it's hard to know.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I see, I look at acting as a sport in some sense, right?
[Guest 2]: It's hard to know what you're doing, right?
[Guest 2]: You know, it's very hard to figure that out.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, and to, to answer your earlier question, which you said, you know, which
[Guest 2]: what are your rules or what are the things you follow?
[Guest 2]: I think you, you know, you, you try and get certain things in place, you know, certain
[Guest 2]: routines in place, maybe you learn your lines, you try and see how this character might behave
[Guest 2]: otherwise or practice in those ways.
[Guest 2]: So that a lot of the routine is taken care of.
[Guest 2]: And you allow yourself more chances for something wonderful to happen where you would be closer
[Guest 2]: to reacting, like maybe the character would react, but how it happens, when it happens,
[Guest 2]: I don't know.
[Guest 2]: And at some level, I think I'm, I'm sort of echoing Rasika here, but I say, I don't want
[Guest 2]: to analyze it too much also, because I sometimes feel that that might take away, you know,
[Guest 2]: from how that happens.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, you try and keep the routines going and it's like, you pull line and length
[Guest 2]: and you just hope that, you know, the ball, you know, takes the edge, you know, you, you
[Guest 2]: increase the probability of something going right.
[Guest 2]: And that's perhaps how I look at it, you know, that you just, you can't, and the other problem,
[Guest 2]: of course, is that, which is probably negating all that I'm saying is that very often you
[Guest 2]: have moments when you think, oh my God, I did something fantastic here, you know, like
[Guest 2]: there was maybe because you surprised yourself and that feels great.
[Guest 2]: And when you watch the film or you watch whatever you've shot, you know, months later, and you're
[Guest 2]: looking for that because you think, oh my God, this was just fantastic, you know, and
[Guest 2]: even the, and sometimes your co-act also feels it, you know, they feel that we had something
[Guest 2]: here, this really was something that worked and it looks very ordinary because there's
[Guest 2]: so much else to it, right?
[Guest 2]: It's also it's context within the story, how it's edited and everything else.
[Guest 2]: And there are some other things you see, which you thought were very mundane and they strike
[Guest 2]: you as, oh, that looks really wonderful.
[Guest 2]: You know, when you didn't really look at it very seriously.
[Guest 2]: So at some level I've stopped or I try not to get too excited about a moment that I thought
[Guest 2]: really worked and vice versa, you know, like sometimes, you know, something just looks
[Guest 2]: fantastic, which you thought was very, you know, you just did it.
[Guest 2]: It wasn't like a big deal and you didn't feel, you know, it's not like, you know, the co-actor
[Guest 2]: and you said, oh, wow, that really felt good.
[Guest 2]: And I think a lot of it is, is that, you know, you surprised yourself, but it may not have
[Guest 2]: worked or it's not just that it's also on the edit, you know, in the context of the
[Guest 2]: broader storytelling, it wasn't a big deal, you know?
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: So I don't know, but that's, that's what I feel about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, what I meant was not in the context of in the moment, because in the moment, I'm
[Amit Varma]: in a Virat Kohli is playing a cover drive and he is self aware of his elbow angle and
[Amit Varma]: his footwork, obviously, he's going to get out immediately.
[Amit Varma]: But in a broader sense of when he looks back at why he's been getting out in single digits
[Amit Varma]: and he says, oh, my stance changed a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: So the angle of the bat, and that's why I've been edging it.
[Amit Varma]: And I would just imagine that, you know, one of the things that we don't do as human beings
[Amit Varma]: too much is examine why we do the things that we do, why we react the things that we do,
[Amit Varma]: we just kind of live life without thinking about it.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that acting is one profession, where you are actually required very often
[Amit Varma]: to take a step back and examine a human being, which is this imagined human being whose,
[Amit Varma]: you know, skin you will inhabit for a while, and think about why they are the way they
[Amit Varma]: are and why they do the things they do.
[Amit Varma]: And would that sort of habit of thinking and a greater self awareness then also percolate
[Amit Varma]: into other aspects of your life was my sort of broader question.
[Guest 2]: I think I did a lot of that unnecessarily myself to myself anyway, I would always think
[Guest 2]: why the hell am I behaving like this?
[Guest 2]: Why am I so angry about something?
[Guest 2]: And I'm not sure I got the right answer.
[Guest 2]: So I think I was like that anyway, I would always analyze myself.
[Guest 2]: But I think your point is well taken that if there is one singular aspect of, you know,
[Guest 2]: playing or inhabiting a character is that you have to think like that character, obviously,
[Guest 2]: which is, you know, I mean, and if again, if there's a singular thing that I look at,
[Guest 2]: and I can clearly say, I think is bad acting or bad performance or bad, you know, depiction
[Guest 2]: of something is, if I don't believe that the characters believes what they say, you know,
[Guest 2]: that they must, at all points in time, and that's true for, you know, you'd call it bad
[Guest 2]: writing, you'd call it bad direction, you call it bad acting and everything else, you
[Guest 2]: have to inhabit the world of that person, you know, and convince us that you believe
[Guest 2]: what you say, you know, and why you do what you say, and I think that's probably a reason
[Guest 2]: why maybe people in the arts, whether they're writers, directors, tend to be a little more
[Guest 2]: left wing, right?
[Guest 2]: Because you tend to, I mean, whether you are, you get more empathetic, because you are in
[Guest 2]: the profession, or whether because you are empathetic, you enter that profession, I don't
[Guest 2]: know.
[Guest 2]: But there tends to be that sense of, of identifying with, you know, why other people do what they
[Guest 2]: do.
[Guest 2]: And I think that moment that Jessica talked about, you know, empathizing with the Delhi
[Guest 2]: police was a fantastic one. And I think, despite all that we may try, we are constantly at
[Guest 2]: a point now in society where we are just losing empathy for a person who's on the other side,
[Guest 2]: you know, of the political divide, and it's, it doesn't help.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it seems to me that, you know, great art embraces complexity. And what we find
[Amit Varma]: in our modern times is that the political discourse is so simplistic and polarized,
[Amit Varma]: where it is not just necessary to argue that the other side is wrong, but it is necessary
[Amit Varma]: to paint them as evil. And, you know, that's my sort of big lament about the discourse.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get carried away into that particular digression, I think we should take a commercial
[Amit Varma]: break because I promise two dichotomies and having gotten one over with before the break,
[Amit Varma]: it is only natural that we save the other one for after the break.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games. Well, if you want
[Amit Varma]: to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com. Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some
[Amit Varma]: of the best contemporary artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use
[Amit Varma]: like tote bags, pouches, and home decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest
[Amit Varma]: modern Indian art at affordable prices, and artists get royalties for every product you
[Amit Varma]: buy. Win-win game. The Indian Colors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable
[Unknown]: dresses for women and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy
[Unknown]: Samanta, Manisha Gherabaswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaideep Mehrotra. Stay
[Unknown]: home but dress smart. And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry
[Amit Varma]: not, you can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian
[Amit Varma]: Colors. Corporate gifting is also available. So head on over to IndianColors.com. There's
[Amit Varma]: Colors with an OU and make art a part of your life. And hey, for a 15% discount, use the
[Unknown]: code unseen. That's right. Unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with Rasika Duggal and Mukul
[Amit Varma]: Chadha about the acting life and their journey in Mumbai and the entertainment industry here.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the second dichotomy that I sort of mentioned is again, something that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of been playing out over the course of your careers in the sense, which is more and
[Amit Varma]: more outsiders coming into the film industry, so to say, like, back in the day, when I first
[Amit Varma]: came to Mumbai in the 90s, it was a very constricted kind of space, it was a particular kind of
[Amit Varma]: person in the film industry, another particular kind of person in the TV industry, they had
[Amit Varma]: their own sort of sensibilities. And in the time that you've been growing in your careers
[Amit Varma]: here and pursuing that, I mean, just in these 12 years, like you mentioned, Rasika, and
[Amit Varma]: I suppose a similar period of time for you, Mukul, is that so much has kind of changed.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, a lot of that is because of the scope of the work, like I often sort of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the analogy that comes to my mind, when I think of what's happened to the entertainment
[Amit Varma]: industry in Mumbai is the IPL. Because what the IPL did was that before the IPL, when
[Amit Varma]: it came to cricket, there were a few superstars who would play test cricket and make it to
[Amit Varma]: the top, but everybody else was basically, there was nothing for them to do, it was just
[Amit Varma]: lifelong frustration. And it seemed to me that at one point, Bollywood was like that,
[Amit Varma]: like in the 90s, I remember telling friends of mine about how the cafes are full of people
[Amit Varma]: who've been struggling for like 20 years, and we'll never get anywhere. And it's so
[Amit Varma]: sad and poignant. But how that has changed is just in the same way that the IPL sort
[Amit Varma]: of opened up opportunities for a much wider pool of people. It seems that you know, all
[Amit Varma]: these web series is coming and just a changing landscape of entertainment has made it easier
[Amit Varma]: for outsiders like you guys to actually come in and hope to build a career and a body of
[Amit Varma]: work here. So tell me a little bit about, you know, what was the landscape of the entertainment
[Amit Varma]: industry? When you guys embarked upon these careers? Like, what did it look like then?
[Amit Varma]: How has it changed? And how have your views of it changed over time?
[Guest 2]: I think that's a great analogy of given in terms of the IPL. And I think what the OTT
[Guest 2]: revolution has done for acting or anything related to content creation is absolutely
[Guest 2]: true. I mean, there's just so much more opportunity for everyone. When I first became an actor,
[Guest 2]: I don't the landscape was different, no doubt. And I don't think I gave as much thought to
[Guest 2]: it. It wasn't that well thought out a decision that okay, this is this career makes sense
[Guest 2]: because the dynamics of this industry are such in fact, if I had done that, I might
[Guest 2]: not have ever become an actor. I became an actor because I wanted to act you know, I
[Guest 2]: did theater to start with it's improv, which I still do. And then you know, whatever roles
[Guest 2]: I could get, I would want to do them. But yeah, when you have very singular stories,
[Guest 2]: which are two hours long, and by definition, you know, it's going to be about one, two
[Guest 2]: or three protagonists. And in a superstar driven world where you know, the spoils all
[Guest 2]: the spoils go to a few people, it's very hard for anybody else to break into it. And also,
[Guest 2]: if you're not going to make a breakthrough at in your early 20s, then you're probably
[Guest 2]: you know, going to be limited to playing fringe characters, which you know, and it's I mean,
[Guest 2]: we've seen so many good actors, and I started acting so many wonderful actors I've seen,
[Guest 2]: spend so much time doing roles on the margins, which don't really, I mean, it's not the length
[Guest 2]: of the role, but the role doesn't, you know, give bent to, you know, their talent and what
[Guest 2]: they can do. That is obviously changed with, you know, technology and the OTT platforms,
[Guest 2]: because it's not just more content coming out, but it's different kinds of stories being
[Guest 2]: told, where you know, it's such a large cast where you don't have to be the protagonist
[Guest 2]: of the story to have an interesting, you know, graph. There's so many, you know, characters
[Guest 2]: who may not be the main leads who have very interesting stories, it's, it's far more novelistic
[Guest 2]: in its telling, right? I mean, the way the whole thing is done. And that's been wonderful.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I'm eternally grateful to it. I don't think I mean, the biggest thing that I've
[Guest 2]: done is the office, I don't think that would have happened. That wouldn't have happened
[Guest 2]: without the OTT revolution. And I would never have been considered I mean, in fact, the
[Guest 2]: office is the first show where I was called for an audition to play the lead, I have never
[Guest 2]: been called for an audition for a lead role before that. Because that just wasn't possible.
[Guest 2]: I mean, leave aside obviously, some, you know, short films or an ad, because that's totally
[Guest 2]: a different thing. But you would not even consider it for that part. You know, and this
[Guest 2]: is the first time you're being considered the fact that someone I mean, I remember the
[Guest 2]: casting director Kavish called me up and said, we're considering auditioning you for the
[Guest 2]: lead, would you be interested? And I was like, where is the question in this? You know, obviously,
[Guest 2]: I would be interested. This is the first time someone's even asking me if I would audition
[Guest 2]: for the lead part. So that was that's great. And I think it's it's been wonderful. I hope
[Guest 2]: it continues as long as it can. Because as far as I'm concerned, I think you know, I
[Guest 2]: just like to do good work. And it just you know, as much of it that can exist is great.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I sort of you know, you sort of preempted a question I was going to ask, but
[Amit Varma]: it's a great observation, which is I'd recently written a post on my newsletter, which was
[Amit Varma]: called a meditation on form is about how the form in which you write can change what you
[Amit Varma]: write and therefore can change the writer. For example, you know, blogging gives you
[Amit Varma]: the freedom to go beyond the dictates of the 800 word op-ed. So you can write an 80 word
[Amit Varma]: observation or an 8000 word essay. And when you can stretch out like that you are often
[Amit Varma]: compelled to think deeper like when I do three hour conversations on my podcast, for example,
[Amit Varma]: I'm compelled to go deeper, you know, give a certain amount of respect to the guests
[Amit Varma]: because I'm no longer playing, you know, gotcha in a 20 minute interview, which is what so
[Amit Varma]: much of television is all about. And the form changes not just the content, but it changes
[Amit Varma]: the writer because of the way that you are then forced to approach it. And what you were
[Amit Varma]: saying about, you know, the novelistic approach that is now possible. Like I remember one
[Amit Varma]: of the reasons I was so blown away by the wire when I first saw it was that it was so
[Amit Varma]: novelistic, you had so many characters who were treated like main characters and the
[Amit Varma]: stories unfolding leisurely through the many episodes. And it was like an epiphany for
[Amit Varma]: me that because before that I thought all cinema was really like a short story, not
[Amit Varma]: like a novel. You had like one linear plotline and a couple of main characters. And my sort
[Amit Varma]: of question to Rasika also, you know, sort of elaborating upon that is that did this
[Amit Varma]: and I'm sure that this form changed the kind of stories and the kind of characters and
[Amit Varma]: is that something that you saw changing? Like I recently saw an interview of Shweta Tripathi
[Amit Varma]: where she said this thing which kind of moved me, which is she was asked about what her
[Amit Varma]: dream roles were. And she said that look, all my dream roles are roles, whenever I think
[Amit Varma]: of something that's a dream role to me is something that's been played by a man. You
[Amit Varma]: know, none of this roles that women play are things that I would necessarily aspire to.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember Seema Pawar also saying somewhere that listen, where are the films that are
[Amit Varma]: dealing with the issues of women past 50? That there is still a landscape of possibility
[Amit Varma]: open out there, especially when it comes to female characters. I mean, looking at your
[Amit Varma]: work, obviously, you've, you know, gotten the opportunity to create strong characters
[Amit Varma]: and you made them your own. But just looking at that sort of landscape in general, as it
[Amit Varma]: is evolving, is the lament premature because things are changing in the right direction?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it something that you think is, you know, still a problem that the sort of the
[Amit Varma]: scope of the roles that someone like you gets is not as vast as the scope that a comparable
[Guest 1]: male actor might get?
[Guest 1]: I think that the scope is not as vast still, but it's much better than earlier. So in that
[Guest 1]: sense, yeah, the long form storytelling has helped that because otherwise, the first victim
[Guest 1]: of a script edit would be the female character. And that was something which was making it
[Guest 1]: very difficult for people like me to get any interesting parts to play, you know, because
[Guest 1]: unless you're the female lead of something, and even the female lead in a mainstream Bollywood
[Guest 1]: film doesn't have much to do as, as we know. But, for example, when Mirzapur was offered
[Guest 1]: to me, and I remember I read the script. And at that time, I had already shot for Mentor.
[Guest 1]: So Karan Anshuman, who was one of the directors of season one, he said, you know, I don't
[Guest 1]: know if you want to do this, because you're doing a female lead, so to say, in a in a
[Guest 1]: film. So I don't know if you want to do this. And when I read the script, I said, I thought
[Guest 1]: to myself, this is a great part. And especially for me to experiment with something like this,
[Guest 1]: it's not a part that I would normally get cast in. If they were thinking of it, stereotypically,
[Guest 1]: they might have gotten somebody who had done roles like that, or had had a different body
[Guest 1]: type or something like that. So I was very excited about it. But I remember thinking
[Guest 1]: if this was a film, I would have been really nervous about this character because she would
[Guest 1]: have probably not had any space. But because this is a series, there is room for her to
[Guest 1]: exist. You know, I've noticed that even very well meaning films where the director might
[Guest 1]: want to really give attention to a character finally, when you edit the film, and you have
[Guest 1]: to keep it a certain length and all of that, the female character suffers a lot. It didn't
[Guest 1]: happen in Manto because Nandita really would really wanted to make something of Safiya.
[Guest 1]: And in fact, Safiya was, what was on screen was more than what was on paper. But I've
[Guest 1]: noticed that it's happened in several other films. So yeah, the OTT space has definitely
[Guest 1]: given room for many more characters and therefore female characters. But of course, if there
[Guest 1]: was room only for three, then who would that have gone to? Would those be male characters
[Guest 1]: or female characters? That's something that we don't know. But also, I feel that in a
[Guest 1]: lot of because feminism is fashionable, and I'm okay to take it even if it's just fashionable,
[Guest 1]: you know, I'll take that anyway. You know, that's, I think that's still a positive thing.
[Guest 1]: But a lot of characters that are written for women are sort of, I mean, I don't know how
[Guest 1]: to describe it. But a lot of times, if it's a female character who's spearheading a show
[Guest 1]: or a film, the character is almost written in a masculine way, you know. So that's something
[Guest 1]: that I'm uncomfortable with. And it's not really celebrating femininity, you know. And
[Guest 1]: but I think the OTT space has sort of done away with a lot of that. Like Shivali's character
[Guest 1]: in Delhi Grime, you know, to write a story on somebody like Chhaya Sharma, I mean, based
[Guest 1]: on Chhaya Sharma, and that's a good thing. So I think the OTT space has done away with
[Guest 1]: a lot of that. In films, I don't know. I think the moment time becomes a limitation, then
[Guest 1]: the female characters become, get, suffer a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sort of just thinking aloud here. But you know, when I was watching Mirzapur,
[Amit Varma]: one I think is profoundly impressive how you did a role that is so different from what
[Amit Varma]: you normally do. And you know, where you are required to sort of communicate, you know,
[Amit Varma]: smouldering sexuality with just a look or a gesture and is both minimal and so effective
[Amit Varma]: at the same time. So that was very impressive. But the other thing that sort of struck me,
[Amit Varma]: which has nothing to sort of do with you is that one tendency that I've noticed in Bollywood,
[Amit Varma]: especially among younger directors over the last 10-15 years or so is, and probably in
[Amit Varma]: a sense started with, you know, Anurag Kashyap and all, is this sort of macho stylism, where
[Amit Varma]: you'll have these sort of very stylized set pieces with a lot of violence and a lot of
[Amit Varma]: this whole sort of, you know, rustic machoness and all of that. And even in Mirzapur, I kind
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, the gratuitous violence of the, you know, the first scenes and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: even later, where it's kind of predictable that, you know, the kattai is going to explode
[Amit Varma]: in the second hand of that character, and they're going to show a bit of the ear or
[Amit Varma]: the bit of the hand of the thing and the car drives over it. And it seems very, you know,
[Amit Varma]: gratuitous and stylized and almost for his own sake. And a couple of related questions
[Amit Varma]: here, and I don't know if you've thought about them. And one of them is that does it sometimes
[Amit Varma]: happen that the success of a particular sort of style, like, you know, to go back to literature,
[Amit Varma]: people often say that one of the problems with Salman Rushdie winning the Booker for
[Amit Varma]: Midnight's Children is that everyone tried writing like him. So for the next two or three
[Amit Varma]: decades, you had young Indian writers who are writing in expressionistic prose, not
[Amit Varma]: nearly as well as Rushdie and that kind of, you know, got in the way of literature. So
[Amit Varma]: looking at cinema, my, you know, untrained observation from an outsider's eye, is that
[Amit Varma]: something similar seems to have happened with this kind of sort of macho stylism, to repeat
[Amit Varma]: that term, sort of having worked in a particular phase of Bollywood, and then everyone kind
[Amit Varma]: of repeats it, and it's very clever, and it makes you feel whatever, but very often the
[Amit Varma]: whole is less than the sum of its parts. And you have all these beautiful, clever set pieces,
[Amit Varma]: which don't really add up to something. So my first question is that, do you think that
[Amit Varma]: there has been something like this, and it is kind of just serendipitous that a certain
[Amit Varma]: kind of film happened to become successful at a certain time, and then everybody imitated
[Amit Varma]: it? Or was it necessarily going to happen anyway? Because this is how people think.
[Amit Varma]: And the other question taking off from what, you know, Rasika was saying was that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, is this one reason why women characters are often written as if from the male gaze,
[Amit Varma]: in these sort of narrow ways? You know, are there, you know, enough women writers out
[Amit Varma]: there? And, you know, is that also changing? I mean, I know, I'm rambling a little bit,
[Amit Varma]: but what are your thoughts on these?
[Guest 1]: So, you know, in films, and especially when something gets mainstream attention, and is
[Guest 1]: successful, in terms of numbers at the box office, it happens that there's a trend of
[Guest 1]: the same kind of films of the same genre, like horror comedy, for example, has been
[Guest 1]: something which has been working, you know. So, and I think that, especially in terms
[Guest 1]: of film distribution and film production, there's so much money involved that people
[Guest 1]: are always tend to follow formula, whatever the formula is at that time. And that I feel
[Guest 1]: happens a lot in films. I'm very pleasantly surprised and grateful that I don't feel that's
[Guest 1]: happening in the OTT space. I feel that there is room for different genres to coexist, like
[Guest 1]: a Maid in Heaven and a Mirzapur, totally different, and very successful, you know. And I don't
[Guest 1]: even know, either the people at the platforms are picking very carefully, or, and doing
[Guest 1]: a very good job, or finally, writing because of the long form nature of the content on
[Guest 1]: OTT space, writing is finally getting the importance that it needed to get all this
[Guest 1]: file. So there are many interesting, new writers, who are writing very interesting content,
[Guest 1]: which is why it's getting made. Or the third thing is that there is no declaration of numbers.
[Guest 1]: Therefore, we might think that both are successful, but maybe one is more successful than the
[Guest 1]: other and we don't know it, you know. I think whatever the reasons is, it's great, because
[Guest 1]: I feel like a multiplicity of genres are happening in the OTT space and original Indian content,
[Guest 1]: like a Panchayat is different from Maid in Heaven, is different from Patal Lok, is different
[Guest 1]: from Delhi Crime, even though Patal Lok and Delhi Crime can be sort of, I mean, I wouldn't
[Guest 1]: really describe Patal Lok as just a police procedural, you know, it's, it's, it's an,
[Guest 1]: in my opinion, epic show. It's like, and Delhi Crime can be possibly described as a police
[Guest 1]: procedural. So I think there's lots of different stuff happening. And a lot of viewers are
[Guest 1]: watching them. I don't know the exact numbers. And I'm very happy that we don't know the
[Guest 1]: numbers, because I think that's really helping keep this space non-formulaic.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a that's a very interesting observation about how a little thing like not knowing
[Amit Varma]: the numbers can, you know, stop the industry from kind of getting into a rut. And so I
[Amit Varma]: sort of teach this writing course where I talk a little bit about Shakespeare as well.
[Amit Varma]: And I keep saying that if Shakespeare lived in modern times, he would, of course, be at
[Amit Varma]: the top of the entertainment world, because he was, you know, the Spielberg plus the Yash
[Amit Varma]: Chopra of his times. And it strikes me now that the most exciting form he would find
[Amit Varma]: is the OTT form, because that's where you can really stretch out and build these long
[Amit Varma]: epic narratives like, you know, Patal Lok, of course, you're right, is a sociological
[Amit Varma]: epic in a sense, much more than just a police procedural. I want to sort of now talk a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about the acting life as you've experienced it in the sense that another thing that kind
[Amit Varma]: of strikes me is, and especially maybe it's changing now, but especially going back 10
[Amit Varma]: years, 12 years more than that, is that as you were, you know, progressing through your
[Amit Varma]: acting career, there must have been a terrible scarcity of good roles that you could really
[Amit Varma]: get your teeth into. So does that sometimes lead to self doubt about am I good enough?
[Amit Varma]: What am I doing here? Does it lead to a frustration about the choice of career where you say,
[Amit Varma]: okay, you know, acting, but this is not the time, ecosystem is not developed enough. How
[Amit Varma]: do you sort of deal with those frustrations? Do you feel yourself compelled to take offers
[Amit Varma]: of roles that might not otherwise excite you or you might not take in an ideal world, but
[Amit Varma]: you're like, you know, I have to keep working, I have to kind of keep the fires burning.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess this is perhaps exacerbated because you are both actors, right? So if one of you
[Amit Varma]: was a banker, as one of you once was, then, you know, you don't have to kind of worry
[Amit Varma]: about stability and all of those things. But you're both actors in Bandra. And it's, it's
[Amit Varma]: not an easy life. How has that sort of journey been like for you guys?
[Guest 2]: I don't think it was that long ago. I mean, not even don't have to go back 10, 12 years.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I think, you know, in any case, I think, I don't know of any actor who hasn't
[Guest 2]: gone through a lot of self doubt. And I think it's something that's endemic to the process.
[Guest 2]: You're constantly, you know, and also the way it works, which is also why I like what
[Guest 2]: we do, because, you know, you don't, it's not easy to rest on your laurels, you know,
[Guest 2]: you kind of, you're starting from scratch again, which is true for many things. But
[Guest 2]: I think it's more so here, like, you can still go and do a really bad job, what you're doing.
[Guest 2]: And acting is also a confidence play, right? Very often when you are in an environment
[Guest 2]: when you don't have the confidence, and maybe the director or the co-actors don't look at
[Guest 2]: you a certain way, it's sometimes harder to perform well as well. And so self doubt is
[Guest 2]: a huge part of the process, you can come home on a day and think, I'm a shit actor, I don't
[Guest 2]: know why I'm even doing this. And then of course, there's the career problems, which
[Guest 2]: is that, you know, if I look back, I think there are a number of times when I have felt,
[Guest 2]: why am I doing this, I should just, you know, quit and do something else. And in my case,
[Guest 2]: it was probably exacerbated by the fact that I had these other interests. So I was constantly
[Guest 2]: dabbling in other things. And, you know, you'd always fool yourself, you know, I'm actually
[Guest 2]: doing this part time, I'm doing that, I could do this, I could do this. But yes, I think
[Guest 2]: it's the hardest thing when people who want to be actors ask, you know, they're very excited
[Guest 2]: now, because it seems like an exciting time. I think this is the hardest part is, you know,
[Guest 2]: dealing with your own demons and fighting that self doubt, because that is happens all
[Guest 2]: the time. We are right now in a golden era. But I just feel that this can also change,
[Guest 2]: right? This is also a gold rush for Indian web series and OTT platforms. There are so
[Guest 2]: many of them that can also change in time, you never know what may happen. While this
[Guest 2]: the going is good, let's go for it. But it's wholly possible that, you know, sometime in
[Guest 2]: the future, one once again, you know, doubts what one is doing. And one does, this is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what we should continue doing. And it's probably too late for you to go back
[Amit Varma]: into banking. So there you go. Though, I should tell our listeners that just last year, Mukul
[Amit Varma]: and I as part of a team called Haryana Hawks won Poker's version of the IPL. So maybe there
[Amit Varma]: is a hope for us yet if acting and podcasting both kind of go out of fashion. Rasika is
[Amit Varma]: laughing, but I don't think she's internally pleased at the thought of Mukul becoming a
[Guest 1]: more regular poker player. I was very excited about that idea. I thought it was a great
[Guest 1]: thing. I was more interested about how can you stay up all night? How can you play? How
[Guest 1]: do you concentrate? And I was very impressed that he used to read books on it. So I was
[Guest 1]: fully encouraging it. And the certificate, right? Oh, yes. I was very pleased. Like a
[Guest 1]: good middle class person. I was extremely pleased when he would come back home with
[Guest 1]: a certificate which said that he'd won something. I was like, nothing else matters. This certificate
[Guest 1]: is the best thing. I framed it also and put it up very embarrassingly.
[Guest 2]: I remember the first tournament I think I won or I placed in and I came back and I wanted
[Guest 2]: to tell Rasika that, you know, I won some money and she was not concerned about that
[Guest 2]: at all. She's like, but you got a certificate. She was very excited about that aspect.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I still have my trophies up on the top of my shelf out there. No, Rasika, I don't
[Amit Varma]: think then Mukul plays enough because there is a term that people use called poker widows
[Amit Varma]: and poker widows are people who have lost their husbands to poker, basically. In the
[Amit Varma]: sense they haven't died. They're not literally widows but poker widows because they've lost
[Amit Varma]: their husbands to poker there. So that thankfully does not seem to have been the case here.
[Amit Varma]: You know, following up from, you know, what Mukul was sort of talking about, Rasika, you've
[Amit Varma]: once mentioned that, you know, when you got into acting, you wanted to do good work for
[Amit Varma]: its own sake, you were just passionate about the work. And in the beginning, you didn't
[Amit Varma]: really care about recognition. But then when Kisa came out, you were like, shit is such
[Amit Varma]: a good film, and I want more people to watch it. And then you do actually feel bad that
[Amit Varma]: it's not getting the kind of reach it is enough people aren't watching it, and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. How does that sort of conflict work out? Because on the one hand, we do this because
[Amit Varma]: we love it. You guys act because you love acting, you're in love with the craft, you're
[Amit Varma]: in love with that whole journey. But at the same time, we are human beings, and we crave
[Amit Varma]: validation. And sometimes these two don't go together, where the you know, the kind
[Amit Varma]: of mainstream work which might have a greater probability to speak in poker terms of getting
[Amit Varma]: us validation is not the kind of work we want to do or which excites us. So how does sort
[Amit Varma]: of one deal with this internal conflict? Is this an issue that you faced?
[Guest 1]: It was not actually, you know, the validation was not so much in terms of numbers. Yeah,
[Guest 1]: I didn't have so many people writing to me early on in my career, saying that, oh, we
[Guest 1]: really like your work or anything like that, because they hadn't seen it or the roles were
[Guest 1]: too small. So in terms of numbers, yeah, the validation was not so much. But I was lucky
[Guest 1]: to have got a lot of validation for my acting work from the film fraternity since Kshay,
[Guest 1]: which was like the small indie film that I had done. And actually, there were a lot of
[Guest 1]: people who were very encouraging at the time that I was doing very small parts in films
[Guest 1]: as well. You know, so I was always if I had, I had done a two scene role, for example,
[Guest 1]: in No Smoking. And there were so many people who I got to meet there, who were working
[Guest 1]: with Anurag at that time. And then those people would constantly recommend me to other work.
[Guest 1]: So that kind of validation was always there. And that sort of kept me going. I had not
[Guest 1]: even imagined the idea of having a fan following or people recognizing me. You know, those
[Guest 1]: were not things that were part of my work culture or not things that people around me
[Guest 1]: spoke about. Very often, the conversations around me were more about, you know, what
[Guest 1]: is the kind of work that you're doing? What is the length of the role? Who are you working
[Guest 1]: with in terms of, you know, the style of the director and not the bigness of the production
[Guest 1]: house? You know, so, so I think those were the things that were happening around me.
[Guest 1]: So I didn't really imagine a scenario where I would have validation, have janta validation,
[Guest 1]: you know, that is not something that I had imagined. So therefore, whatever came was
[Guest 1]: a bonus. And so I was always thrilled by that rather than feeling bad about how it could
[Guest 1]: have been. But the only point that you're right, I felt a little let down was the time
[Guest 1]: that Kista had released and that's because Kista had only two screens in Bombay. It released
[Guest 1]: in two cinema halls in Bombay, you know. So that was shattering because it was, it was
[Guest 1]: released so poorly, right? And once yeah, something has got attention, then it becomes
[Guest 1]: difficult if something else that you do doesn't get the same kind of attention. But all that
[Guest 1]: has been so recent in my life that I have, I think I still haven't gotten over celebrating
[Guest 1]: that and I'm still not in the phase. But yeah, like the kind of validation that, the kind
[Guest 1]: of fan following, I won't even say validation, the kind of fan following that Mirzapur had.
[Guest 1]: If another show doesn't get that, I'm like, Oh my God, is it not as popular as Mirzapur?
[Guest 1]: Because once I've tasted that, I do feel like it would be nice to maintain it. But it was
[Guest 1]: not something in the years that I was looking for work or not getting enough work. It was
[Guest 1]: not something that preoccupied me at all. Because it was not the kind of conversations
[Guest 1]: that people around me were also having. It was a very, and I think a lot of actors who
[Guest 1]: I acted with in theatre at that time, who are now celebrities, so to say, in the OTT
[Guest 1]: space, all of us joke about it once in a while, you know, we're like, okay, forget about the
[Guest 1]: theatre mentality, you've become a star now. That kind of thing. Because none of us used
[Guest 1]: to think like that or talk like that.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, earlier you pointed out, you know, how if something is successful, there's
[Amit Varma]: so much money riding in the entertainment industry that that almost becomes a formula
[Amit Varma]: and people want to keep repeating that. And it strikes me that even in the context of
[Amit Varma]: acting, when a good actor gets into the skin of a character and plays it so well that it
[Amit Varma]: seems that you know, that is who they are, you know, is there then a danger of getting
[Amit Varma]: typecast and getting the same kind of sort of roles offered to you? And obviously, Rasika,
[Amit Varma]: you've, you know, played sort of a variety of roles by now in very different kind of
[Amit Varma]: projects. So people know that's not the case. But in the early part of your arc, is that
[Amit Varma]: a worry? And also, you know, in a recent interview, Manav Kaul kind of pointed out about how the
[Amit Varma]: term actor sort of has a secondary status to the term star, you know, that we are still
[Amit Varma]: in a, in an industry which worships stars, and actors are almost like second class citizens
[Amit Varma]: that ONC character role karwa denge and whatever. And I'm assuming that must have changed massively
[Amit Varma]: over the last few years. But you know, what's your experience of that been like?
[Guest 2]: I think typecast is something that happens all the time. And you know, I find it's not
[Guest 2]: just casting directors who do it, but I noticed that it happens with even friends of ours.
[Guest 2]: And that's when you realize that this is true. People think of you as something because they,
[Guest 2]: you know, see you do that. I remember, you know, there was a time I was doing a lot of
[Guest 2]: ads, and Rasika was doing a film, and she would get no ads, and she would wonder why
[Guest 2]: and I would get no films. And it's the same casting directors would call us, but they
[Guest 2]: would when they had an ad role, they would call me and they would, you know, and they
[Guest 2]: wouldn't think of it the other way, because it's just that yeah, I think I yeah, for me,
[Guest 2]: I always found that, you know, I got slotted into which did wonders for me in terms of
[Guest 2]: doing a whole bunch of ads. But in terms of this corporate guy, right? I mean, like, I'm
[Guest 2]: almost negative towards it when I get a call, and I hear that the guy works in a corporate
[Guest 2]: office, my antenna go up, I immediately think this must be some ridiculous role that they're
[Guest 2]: calling me for, because I'm going to school, you know, they're calling my number up. And
[Guest 2]: sometimes the role could be interesting, but I'm just sort of, you know, very to begin
[Guest 2]: with. And yeah, I think it's an endeavor on my part to try and do as varied roles as possible,
[Guest 2]: because luckily, we're in a time where that's possible, but there's this, you know, there's
[Guest 2]: so much more demand now that hopefully, you can try and experiment a little bit and try
[Guest 2]: and push yourself. And I'm trying to do that. Now there's some projects I'm working on,
[Guest 2]: which are, you know, trying to break away and do something totally different. And you
[Guest 2]: find that I mean, you find that with, you know, with casting directors, you keep telling
[Guest 2]: them, you know, like, for example, I did a show last year, you know, a small part in
[Guest 2]: a Balaji show, and the casting guy who cast me for office said, he was watching, he said,
[Guest 2]: I was wondering how you're doing it, because I couldn't think of you as anybody but Jagdeep
[Guest 2]: Chandra. And you feel bad because you feel like, you know, if the casting person is saying
[Guest 2]: this, that, you know, they only see you as that character, it's going to be a lot more
[Guest 2]: effort to break out of it, right? And you and you really want to, that's, that's really
[Guest 2]: a huge endeavor.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I also found the role of Jagdeep Chandra really interesting, because you're,
[Amit Varma]: you know, obviously, the brief of the role is this over the top, ebullient, enthusiastic
[Amit Varma]: kind of guy and you played it so well, that is very easy for me to see why people would,
[Amit Varma]: you know, imagine that in real life, maybe he's the one. So are you going to do more
[Amit Varma]: writing now? Because Banana Bread, which I'll of course, recommend to all my listeners and
[Amit Varma]: reading from the show notes was such a wonderful little miniature with the two of you, you
[Amit Varma]: know, one of the best users of the lockdown that I've seen among people that I know, are
[Amit Varma]: you going to do more writing and, you know, even directing at some point, maybe?
[Guest 2]: Writing? Yes. I'm so I mean, I think Banana Bread has been a shot in the arm in that sense.
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's given a lot of confidence. And I'm actually, we're actually working on something,
[Guest 2]: I don't want to say too much to jinx it, but we're trying to work on another project to
[Guest 2]: write something. So, you know, I, like I said earlier, I've always wanted to do more writing.
[Guest 2]: The only scope I got of it was some storytelling that I did live storytelling, you know, so
[Guest 2]: you have to craft your own piece and perform it, which I've done four or five stories.
[Guest 2]: But now, yeah, I think I'm feeling a little encouraged because of Banana Bread and it's
[Guest 2]: a bit of a push. So I do want to push on that front for sure. Direction, I don't know, it
[Guest 2]: may be, you know, maybe later in the future, who knows, but right now, it's not a plan.
[Amit Varma]: But I think definitely, hopefully. And so I've taken up a lot of your time, I'll just
[Amit Varma]: ask a couple of more questions to both of you, one more general and one sort of about
[Amit Varma]: your personal journeys. And the general one is that, you know, in a sense, we are, we've
[Amit Varma]: lived through a very transformative period in Indian cinema and Indian entertainment
[Amit Varma]: the last 20-30 years, just in terms of the way the world has opened up the role that
[Amit Varma]: technology has played, all of that. It's so exciting. And you and as the formats are changing,
[Amit Varma]: you also find that storytelling is evolving, the art is going to different places. What
[Amit Varma]: are in general, when you look at this journey, and when you see how it's going, I mean, you
[Amit Varma]: know, where do you kind of see this progression going? Like, is there a trap that eventually,
[Amit Varma]: you know, more formulas will come out of it? And what is now a loosely forming ecosystem
[Amit Varma]: will get ossified in its ways. And again, you'll have these big players and these massive
[Amit Varma]: strugglers or, you know, what is your sort of view of all of this? Because you've actually
[Amit Varma]: been participants in this whole process over the last decade or so.
[Guest 1]: I'm not sure. I hope it remains as it is today. Because I think the big problem that I was
[Guest 1]: facing before the OTT space boom was the problem of distribution and distribution remained
[Guest 1]: the bottleneck for a very long time, especially in the kind of films that I was working in,
[Guest 1]: like the example of Kisa, releasing only in two theatres. So I think technology had moved
[Guest 1]: at that time, such that producing a film had become much cheaper, because things had moved
[Guest 1]: from film film to cameras were digital. So the cost of production had fallen significantly.
[Guest 1]: Also, a lot of one crore films that had reasonable success at that time, films like Beja Fry,
[Guest 1]: had started a kind of trend. So when I joined, when I started acting, when I moved to Bombay,
[Guest 1]: there was a whole period which initially was encouraging that a lot of production houses
[Guest 1]: were producing smaller films, a lot of smaller production houses were springing up, but distribution
[Guest 1]: remained a bottleneck for a very long time. And I think it took a year or two for everybody
[Guest 1]: to realize, you know, we are producing all this great content, but we're not being able
[Guest 1]: to find ways to distribute it. And then the OTT space happened. And I think that it has,
[Guest 1]: for the last three, four years, been still democratic, still not releasing numbers, still
[Guest 1]: encouraging newness, because I feel like a lot of actors became, quote unquote, successful
[Guest 1]: in the early phase of the OTT space. But now still, there are different actors who are
[Guest 1]: coming in every day, actors, directors, writers with new shows, which are becoming successful.
[Guest 1]: So it's not like there's no room for newness. And there seems to be still room for newness,
[Guest 1]: which I think is healthy. So I hope that that lasts. I'm not sure. But you know, recently,
[Guest 1]: some platforms have started releasing numbers in some ways, and I'm very, very wary of that.
[Guest 2]: So I hope that that doesn't happen. Yeah, I think, you know, in a lot of ways, we're
[Guest 2]: really lucky. I mean, for all that, you know, you mentioned earlier that, you know, going
[Guest 2]: through periods of self doubt and all that, you suddenly find yourself in that zone where
[Guest 2]: there's a gold rush right now. And it's wonderful to be a part of the generation that's in the
[Guest 2]: gold rush, because it's really a benefit to you. And even if this were to die down at
[Guest 2]: some point in time, or the boom sort of reduces in size to some extent, hopefully, you've
[Guest 2]: done some work that you know, people recognize you and you've got an opportunity to do it,
[Guest 2]: which doesn't happen. I like what Rasika says. I mean, the distribution was this big bottleneck
[Guest 2]: earlier. You know, like another film I did, Gurgaon, I remember, it got such few screens
[Guest 2]: in the theaters, that my parents wanted to see it. And they're a very biased audience,
[Guest 2]: right? They want to go and see it. And they couldn't because, you know, they weren't screens
[Guest 2]: near their house at convenient times. It was, you know, it was just that tells you what
[Guest 2]: kind of problems there were, right? You could make a film, but you couldn't distribute it.
[Guest 2]: Now that distribution sort of those gateways have opened because you don't not just have
[Guest 2]: the OTT, but you have many OTT platforms. And I think you have them because everybody
[Guest 2]: is sort of trying to grab market share and go for it. There may come a time and this
[Guest 2]: is my fear, because I'm always the pessimist who thinks about what the problems down the
[Guest 2]: road are. But my fear is that if you again get to a point where there are only two or
[Guest 2]: three OTT platforms and you have a different oligopoly now, you have, you know, Cartel,
[Guest 2]: that was your cinema theater distribution chains. Now it goes to only two OTT platforms.
[Guest 2]: You can have the same problem where they will just sort of command, you know, what work
[Guest 2]: they want seen. And, you know, the terms of trade just changed completely towards them.
[Guest 2]: So that's a fear that I have that that may happen. I hope that doesn't happen. I hope
[Guest 2]: you do have, you know, a more even playing field where you had many, many more platforms
[Guest 2]: because that allows for then, you know, proper competition. And that's good. The thing I'm
[Guest 2]: hopeful of is that, you know, because data has become so cheap in India, that's a big
[Guest 2]: part of what is happening. I mean, you know, we always wondered, you know, why people watch
[Guest 2]: what is coming on general entertainment, television shows, and we thought it will never change.
[Guest 2]: And now suddenly, you know, it's changing very fast. And I think it's also because people
[Guest 2]: have access to a lot more shows. There's a lot more they can see, and then they will
[Guest 2]: make that switch. So with data becoming cheap, and people are watching things across the
[Guest 2]: world. I think that's great for all of us, because I find that true for me, I think,
[Guest 2]: I think the quality of what, you know, even what actors are doing, what writers are doing,
[Guest 2]: they, you know, they're raising the bar constantly, and you feel that pressure. And that's a good
[Guest 2]: pressure that you just can't do what you were doing earlier, you know, people are people
[Guest 2]: are pushing themselves to do better and better work. And I hope that that sort of global
[Guest 2]: influence continues, because, you know, of technology enabling us to see a lot from everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, I mean, just thinking aloud, it also strikes me that, you know, the bottleneck
[Amit Varma]: has now shifted from distribution to our individual attentional capacity. And therefore, what
[Amit Varma]: becomes important is what are the filters? How are you discovering content? And if those
[Amit Varma]: filters are these mainstream filters, like you said, maybe, if they all consolidate into
[Amit Varma]: two, three OTT platforms, then competition goes down, and you're not sort of serving
[Amit Varma]: the long tail quite so well, though, your parents will still be able to log on to Netflix
[Amit Varma]: and see your shows, I hope. And so I'm actually going to cheat. I said this, I had led you
[Amit Varma]: to believe I'll have one question after this, but I thought of another one. So anyway, so
[Amit Varma]: I'll throw in this extra one, which is that if there are aspiring young actors, or even
[Amit Varma]: people who want to get into entertainment as directors or writers, whatever, but especially
[Amit Varma]: actors, because, you know, that's what you guys have excelled at, what advice would you
[Amit Varma]: give them not in terms of, you know, the kind of work they should do or whatever, because
[Amit Varma]: that's really no one's control, but how should they approach all of this? How should they
[Amit Varma]: look at it? Like, what advice would you give you guys give to a younger Mukul and Rasika
[Amit Varma]: from 12 years ago, if you could, you know, send them a letter through a time machine?
[Guest 1]: You know, anybody who tells me they want to become an actor, I say, please don't. It's
[Guest 1]: a long process. And God knows what might happen. You know, there's no surety of where your
[Guest 1]: career will go. And there's no one way of getting it right. And it's such a matter of
[Guest 1]: chance that, and things have to just align in a certain way at a certain time. And you
[Guest 1]: might be the most talented, most hardworking, good at networking, all of that. And you still
[Guest 1]: might not be able to get the projects that get you more work or have a career, which
[Guest 1]: is long and fulfilling, you know, so it's, it's so full of uncertainties that I feel
[Guest 1]: very nervous every time anybody tells me that they want to become an actor. And I think
[Guest 1]: if I thought things through, I wouldn't have, it would have been too scary. You know, but
[Guest 1]: I just didn't think things through. I was just too enthusiastic about everything that
[Amit Varma]: was coming my way. No, that's, that's really insightful. And it's, it's an illustration
[Amit Varma]: of the survivorship bias, which is that you look at people at the top of a field and you
[Amit Varma]: imagine that, oh, I'm going to be that person, but your probability of actually getting there
[Amit Varma]: may be so ridiculously low, that is better not to do it at all, which is why I think
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, that cliched advice with self help authors will sometimes give people a
[Amit Varma]: follow your dreams can actually be very dangerous advice, because so many people who follow
[Amit Varma]: their dreams, just completely fall apart. And maybe it's better just to do your degrees
[Amit Varma]: and get all that into place. And that kind of middle class mentality, I can't, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the 20 year old me heard me saying this today, he would be so horrified and shocked. Mukul,
[Guest 2]: you have anything to sort of add to?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I just want to say like, like Raseka said, I think I didn't think it through entirely.
[Guest 2]: Otherwise, I might not have been here. If I had been my pessimistic self and said, what
[Guest 2]: are the chances I have for any form of success, I would have very quickly said that, look,
[Guest 2]: this is not working, you have to do something else. So I kind of have almost contradictory
[Guest 2]: advice to a younger version of myself, because on the one hand, acting is such a success
[Guest 2]: that it is so difficult that you have to play the long game, you have to just keep hanging
[Guest 2]: in there. So that you know, something, it may just take his time, you never know when
[Guest 2]: you get a break, or when something happens that allows you to get that validation and
[Guest 2]: allows you to get more work and carry on, you can't obviously bet on some OTT revolution
[Guest 2]: coming some years down the line. So I think to some extent, I might have survived also
[Guest 2]: because I kind of did other things. On the other hand, my advice to myself is don't get
[Guest 2]: distracted by doing other things. You know, I have some sense of focus, because I do feel
[Guest 2]: that I did waste a lot of time and a number of years, because I was sort of dabbling in
[Guest 2]: multiple things and not focused on one thing. So I don't know, it's a mix of the two. That
[Guest 2]: you know, play the long game, but at the same time, I'm focused. But to your point that
[Guest 2]: you know, don't, I'm always someone to advise people to take more risks in life, you know,
[Amit Varma]: always take more risks, because I think it's the payoffs are much greater, the risk is
[Guest 2]: higher, but the payoffs are so much greater. If it doesn't work, then you have to of course,
[Guest 2]: the tough part is to have the ability to walk away at some point and then and then you know,
[Guest 2]: try something else. But I think we don't take enough risk in life. And this could be a long
[Guest 2]: philosophical discussion, which is kind of pointless. But I mean, it's been a fun journey.
[Guest 2]: I don't have any regrets about it, despite the many ups and downs. And even if it turns
[Guest 2]: out that, you know, four years later, I have to say that, you know, this is it, and I've
[Guest 2]: got to do something else, or I choose to do something else. It's been a fun journey.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, you know, this adds a new dimension to something that I often say, where I'll
[Amit Varma]: often tell people that self delusion is a prerequisite to success. And the sense that
[Amit Varma]: I mean it in is that when you begin doing something, you're pretty bad at it, by definition,
[Amit Varma]: because you have begun. And if you were to actually recognize how bad you are at it,
[Amit Varma]: you would not do it at all, you would be so disheartened. But because you think you're
[Amit Varma]: good, and you want to keep doing it, you just keep doing it, doing it, doing it, and endless
[Amit Varma]: iterations in the 10,000 hours, and so on, eventually make you good at it. So you have
[Amit Varma]: to be self delusional at the start. But the layer that you guys added to it is that the
[Amit Varma]: probability of success is so incredibly low, that if we were clear sighted about that,
[Amit Varma]: at the start, we might decide not to take the risk, no matter how great the payoff is.
[Amit Varma]: But we overestimate our abilities and our chances. And therefore, we kind of go down
[Amit Varma]: that road. My final question to you is, and you guys have been so patient, this is almost
[Amit Varma]: this is actually longer than some films that you guys will make. So thank you so much for
[Unknown]: doing this.
[Unknown]: It's the OTT world now.
[Amit Varma]: It's the OTT world now. Long form. So my final question to you guys is that in these incredibly
[Amit Varma]: exciting times, and just as a consumer, I am excited. And I'm so excited for you guys
[Amit Varma]: as well, because of the kind of work that's coming out. Where do you see yourself five
[Amit Varma]: years from now? What are Mukul and Rasika doing five years from now, or even 10 years
[Amit Varma]: from now, whatever you kind of prefer? Who are you five years from now? What is the kind
[Amit Varma]: of work that you're doing in the sort of universe you're engrossed in the kind of roles that
[Amit Varma]: are playing? Give me a sense of how you would like it to go? Let's, let's not end on possible
[Guest 1]: notes of despair.
[Guest 1]: I would like to be a part of, you know, like be involved in ideating a project, because
[Guest 1]: that's something as an actor, I feel that I have very little agency, when I arrive to
[Guest 1]: do my work, it's been written, which is half done. It's being visualized by somebody else.
[Guest 1]: I don't want to be that somebody else visualizing it, it's too much responsibility to be a director,
[Guest 1]: you have to have, I feel you have to be God to be a director, you know, you have to, you
[Guest 1]: have to know everything and be a good manager and know exactly what works with somebody
[Guest 1]: and what doesn't work with somebody else. It's, I don't know how people sign up for
[Guest 1]: a job like that. It's very, very difficult. So I don't want to be that. But yeah, I'd
[Guest 1]: like to put a project together and be involved in it from the initiation of it, stories that
[Guest 1]: I'm interested in telling and being a part of as an actor. Also, really, I'm very interested
[Guest 1]: in doing some international work. So if I can sort of expand to that, I would feel very
[Guest 1]: happy. Because I feel that I've been taken in by many actors and shows and films that
[Guest 1]: I've seen in Hollywood. And that's been interesting to me. And I would I wonder how it would be
[Guest 1]: to work in another culture as an actor, you know, that there would be an added layer of
[Guest 1]: vulnerability there. So I think that would be interesting.
[Guest 2]: I think where I stand right now, so what I'm, I would like to do as much varied work as
[Guest 2]: possible play as many varied characters as possible. And I think that maybe comes from
[Guest 2]: the earlier statement of having felt this pressure of being typecast, but I really would
[Guest 2]: want to do as many things. And you know, you talked about self delusion, I think actors
[Guest 2]: are particularly delusional about themselves, because we believe that we can play any part
[Guest 2]: out there. I mean, somebody's grandmother's role, I play that no problem, I believe I
[Guest 2]: can do it. And I think at some level, if you don't have that delusion, you're not going
[Guest 2]: to be able to carry on on this journey, you have to have belief that, you know, I can
[Guest 2]: do this as well as the greatest person who's who's playing this part. So I would like to
[Guest 2]: do as many I would say as many roles, as many interesting roles as many conflicted roles
[Guest 2]: as possible, reflected characters as possible. And I also would like to write more. And,
[Guest 2]: and hopefully, you know, put something out there, because I do think actually, the hardest
[Guest 2]: part and the least appreciated part of any project is the writing. And I think we in
[Guest 2]: India haven't given as much due to writers. Hopefully, that will change. But that's also
[Guest 2]: I think the most critical success factor for a project to me is how good the writing is,
[Guest 2]: you know, you can you can get by with everything else not being as as great, but the writing
[Guest 2]: is what carries something through. And, and I'm also drawn to it. So hopefully, that also
[Amit Varma]: happens. I'm so full of hope now. I mean, best of luck for all the projects that you
[Amit Varma]: not only act in, but also conceptualize and write and all of that. Thank you so much for
[Guest 1]: your time and your insights and coming on the show.
[Guest 1]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, please check out the show notes where much
[Amit Varma]: of Rasika and Mukul's work is linked. Take your time and savor it. Some of it is magical.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Rasika on Twitter at Rasikadugal. You can follow Mukul at Mukul Chadha. You
[Amit Varma]: can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A-C. All of us just use our names for our Twitter
[Amit Varma]: handle, nothing fancy about it. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.